Welcome to the complete HTML
and CSS course. In this course,
we're going to learn how to build
websites from a beginner to a professional
level, and by the end of this course,
we're going to build youtube.com.
Now you don't need any previous
coding or technical experience.
This course is designed to be your first
step to becoming a software engineer.
We're going to start from the very basics
of HTML and CSS and build our way up
step by step. And along the way,
we're going to learn all the major skills
that we need to create websites at a
professional level.
You can find the different sections of
this course below the video here and
here. And after each section,
I'm going to give you a bunch of
exercises that you can do on your own to
practice the skills that
we learned in total.
This course is going to have
more than 100 exercises. Lastly,
you don't have to worry
about taking notes.
I created an HTML and CSS reference that
will list everything that we learned in
this course. With that
said, let's get started.
I am going to be doing
this course on a Mac,
but everything is the same for a
Windows computer. Before we begin,
we're going to need two pieces of
software, a web browser and a code editor.
A web browser lets us view
websites on the internet.
It's also going to let us view the
website that we create in this course.
The most popular web browser for
web development is Google Chrome.
A code editor helps us
write our HTML and CSS code.
The most popular code editor for
web development is called VS.
Code or Visual Studio Code.
To install both of these,
we can go to google.com
and then search for Google
Chrome or for VS code and then
open the first result and follow the
instructions to download and install.
Once we have those two installed,
we can start the course.
We'll begin by learning what is html.
HTML stands for
hypertext markup language. You don't
have to worry about what that means.
Just know that it's a tool
that we use to create websites.
Every website from YouTube to Google
to Amazon uses a combination of
HTML and CSS to create everything
that we see on the website.
The easiest way to
understand what HTML is,
is that we're simply giving
instructions to a computer.
We're telling the computer
what to do step by step.
The computer will then follow our
instructions to create our website.
So I find the best way to learn HTML
is to jump in and give it a try.
So we're going to create our first
HTML file and our first website.
Let's go to our computer and we're
going to create a new folder.
So this folder is going to contain
all the code for this course.
I'm going to call this
HTML dash CSS dash course.
Next, we're going to open this
folder in our code editor.
So I'm going to open vs code,
and then I'm going to click file open
and I'm going to find the folder that
we just created, which is this one.
Now once that's open,
you should see the folder name at
the top here and on the side here.
Now let's create our first HTML file.
We're going to click this icon to create
a new file and we're going to call this
file website dot html.
So we have to make sure that
this file ends with html.
This tells a computer that this file
contains HTML code rather than just text.
So as I mentioned, HTML is basically some
instructions you give to the computer.
We're going to learn
our first instruction,
which is less than button greater
than, and we also need to type
lesson slash button greater than,
but our code editor might
auto complete this for us.
So this is an instruction to create
a button and inside the button we're
going to have the text. Hello.
Now let's save our file and we're going
to learn how to open this in our web
browser. To open our new website,
we're going to go to the
folder that contains our code.
We're going to find our HTML file.
We're going to right click
open with Google Chrome.
And now you can see that we have our first
website that has a button with a text
Hello inside. And if we
look back to our code,
that's exactly the instruction that we
gave to the computer. So as you can see,
HTML is pretty straightforward. It's
pretty easy to understand what's going on.
Now let's try another instruction. We
can give to the computer on a new line.
We're going to type less
than P, greater than,
and we also need to type less
than slash p greater than,
and our code editor might
auto complete this for us too.
So the P here stands for a paragraph.
This is a paragraph of text.
Inside our paragraph,
we can put some text.
So let's put the text paragraph of text.
Now we can save this and to get our
website to reflect our most current code,
we're going to go to our webpage and
refresh. And now you can see that our
website is displaying a paragraph of text
just like we told the computer to do.
So that's basically how HTML works.
The computer reads our HTML
code from top to bottom and then
follows those instructions and
creates a button and a paragraph
of text.
If we reverse the order of
these lines, for example,
if I put the paragraph up
here and I save it and refresh
the page, then the paragraph
will appear on top because again,
the computer is just following
our instructions one by one.
Now I'm going to introduce
some terminology.
So each of these things
that we're displaying on the
webpage is called an HTML
element.
So a button is a type of HTML element
and a paragraph is another type of
HTML element.
So element is just a generic term that
we use to describe anything that we can
display on the webpage,
and we're going to be using this term
element throughout this course. So now I
want to explain why we have to write all
of these symbols that's less than this,
greater than, and this less than
slash This is something called syntax.
Syntax are the rules for how a coding
language like HTML should be written.
If you think of a language like English,
we have something called grammar,
which is the rules of the language.
Syntax is basically the same thing
except for coding languages. Now,
the biggest difference between a language
like English and a coding language is
that in English, you don't have to
follow the rules of grammar perfectly.
People can still understand
you, but in a coding language,
if you don't follow the rules of syntax,
the computer won't understand
your code. For example,
let's break the rules of syntax by
deleting this greater than symbol,
and now we're going to save our file
and we're going to go to our website and
refresh. And now you notice
that our button is gone,
and that's because we're not
following the proper syntax.
So the computer doesn't
understand our HTML code anymore.
So let's put that greater design back
so that we're following the proper rules
of syntax and we don't need this.
So let's save and refresh our page.
And now our button is back because
we're following the rules of syntax.
So what exactly are the
syntax rules for H T M L?
So this part of the code
is called an H T M L tag.
It basically tells a computer
what we're trying to create.
We write a tag by writing the less
than symbol. This is the tag name,
which tells a computer what kind
of element we're trying to create,
and then the greater then symbol.
So every element consists of
two tags in opening tag and a
closing tag. The closing tag
is the same as the opening tag,
except it has a slash in
front of the tag name.
That's how you can tell
it is a closing tag.
You can think of the opening tag as the
start of the button and the closing tag
as the end of the button.
And then in between is a content
or the text inside the button.
And the same thing for the paragraph.
The paragraph has an opening tag,
a closing tag, and some
content inside the paragraph.
So as long as we follow
these syntax rules for html,
we have an opening tag and a closing tag,
and the closing tag starts with
a slash in front of the tag name.
Then our computer will know what to do
and display our elements on our webpage.
The next element that we're going to
learn is a link to another website. For
example, if we go to Google and
we search for something on Google,
it will give us a bunch of links
and when we click these links,
it will take us to another website.
So we're going to learn how
to do that in our HTML code.
So we'll go back to our website here
and in our code we're going to type less
than a greater than.
So this A here represents
an anchor element.
An anchor is basically a
link to another website.
So inside this anchor we're going
to put the text of our link.
So let's put the text as link to YouTube.
We're going to save this and the
refresh, and now we have a link,
but if we click this, it doesn't
actually take us to YouTube,
and that's because we haven't told the
computer where this link is supposed to
take us. Right now we just have
a link without a destination.
So to set a website to link to,
we have to learn a little
bit more HTML syntax.
So we're going to go into the opening
tag and we're going to type space
HREF equals double quotes, double quotes.
So inside these quotes we're going to
copy and paste YouTube's website url.
So to get that we can go to our
webpage and then type in youtube.com.
And at the top here we have the url.
So we're going to copy this
and paste this into our quotes.
And now we're going to save our file.
We're going to go back to
our website and refresh.
And now we have a link that we can
click. So when we click this link,
it's now going to take us to youtube.com.
So that's how we create a link
to another website with html.
Now let's go back here and
explain what this syntax means.
So this is called an HTML attribute.
An attribute basically modifies how
an element behaves. In this example,
we are using the href attribute and it
determines where this link element will
take us When we click it right
now it's going to youtube.com,
but if we change this, it will
take us to a different website.
So this attribute is modifying
how the link element behaves.
So the syntax rules for an attribute
are we have to have a space between the
attribute and the tag name.
Otherwise, if I write href here,
the browser is just going to think
that this whole thing is a tag name.
So that's why we have to have a space.
So then we're going to have an
equal sign and double quotes.
So the text to the left of the equal
sign is known as the attributes name,
and on the right side is the value.
The value must be surrounded by
double quotes as you can see here. So
you can kind of think of it like this.
The name tells us what we're modifying.
The value tells us what
we are modifying it to.
So the H tells us we're modifying the
destination of this link and we're
modifying it to youtube.com.
We can also have multiple attributes
on an element to add another attribute,
we just separated with a space like this,
and now we're going to add another
attribute to our link element,
and this one is called target.
So the target attribute determines whether
this link opens in the current page
or in a new tab. So by default, if
we don't have a target attribute,
it opens in the current page like this.
But if we set the target
attribute to underscore blank,
now this link element
will open in a new tab.
So let's go to our webpage and
refresh and click this link.
YouTube will now open in a new tab.
So by using attributes we
can modify different parts
of this element's behavior.
The H RF attribute modifies where this
link goes and the target attribute
modifies whether this link opens in
a new tab or in the current page.
Keep in mind that the h r and target
attributes only work on the link element.
The button and the paragraph elements
have their own set of attributes that we
can modify, and we're going to learn
these later on in the course. But for now,
I just wanted to introduce you to the
idea of using attributes to modify our
HTML elements.
The last thing we're going to learn in
this lesson is some weird quirks of the
HTML syntax.
So something that a lot of beginners
have trouble with is that in html,
if you have multiple spaces
like this, for example,
if we save this file and we reload,
you'll notice that all of these spaces
just appear as one space on the website,
and that's because
according to the syntax,
extra spaces are essentially ignored.
So beginners usually have trouble
with this because for example,
if they want to add space between
this button and this link,
they would start adding spaces in
front of the link thinking that it will
move it away from the button. So
if we save this and we refresh,
nothing happens.
And that's because all of these spaces
are essentially ignored in html.
So later in the course, we're going to
learn how to deal with these situations,
but for now, just keep this in mind.
So let's get rid of these
extra spaces for now.
And another weird quirk of the
syntax rule is that if I put my
cursor here and I press enter to create
a new line and I put my cursor here,
again, these new lines
also count as spaces,
so the browser essentially ignores them.
If I save the file and reload, you'll see
that the new line doesn't do anything.
So this actually makes organizing
our HTML code very flexible.
For example,
if I wanted some more space between these
elements so that it's easier to read
in my code,
I can just add as much spaces as I
want and it won't get reflected in the
website because extra spaces like
these new lines are just ignored.
A lot of people like to put the content
of the element on its own line like this
so that the tags basically align
with each other in the same column.
And same thing for here. You'll
notice that this line is really long.
We can actually add new lines here
to make our code easier to read.
So when we organize our code like this,
we generally indent or add spaces in
front of these lines. This helps us
clearly tell the difference between
the elements, tags and its contents.
If we didn't have this indenting,
then it's pretty hard to tell where
this element starts and where it ends,
especially when we have a lot of code.
Now your indents might look
a little different from mine.
It might look something like this
where you have more spaces than I do.
This happens because by default vs.
Code uses four spaces per indent.
Generally in HTML and css,
we use two spaces per indent.
To update this,
we're going to go down to this bottom
toolbar and click this section,
and then we're going to
click indent using spaces,
and we'll change this from four to two.
So now this file is going to
use two spaces per indent,
so we can get rid of this and
press tab to have proper indenting.
Now that only affects
it for the current file.
We can change it for every file going
forward by going to the bottom left here
and clicking this icon and
then going into settings.
And in here we're going
to search for tab size,
and I'm going to scroll down and we'll
change the tab size from four to two.
All right, so we just learned the
basics of html, how to write HTML code,
and then turn that into a website.
We also learned how to write HTML
attributes which modify the behavior of an
element, and we learned about syntax,
which are the rules that we had
to follow when writing our code.
Here are some exercises that you can try
on your own to practice what we learned
in this lesson. Feel free to pause
the video here if you need to.
You can find these solutions as well
as more exercises on my website.
Super simple.dev. The
link is below the video.
In this lesson,
we're going to learn CSS or cascading
style sheets based on the name.
It's used to style our webpage,
so it's used to change the
appearance of our H C M L elements.
So I've actually prepared a project
that we can do in this lesson.
So we're going to open this
project by going to super
simple.dev/exercises/buttons.
So on this webpage I have some really
nice looking buttons from famous websites,
namely YouTube and Twitter that we
can copy and practice our CSS with.
So we're going to go into our code and
we're actually going to create a new file
for this exercise.
So let's create a new file
and let's call it buttons dot
html.
And we're going to open our
new HTML file in our browser.
So that's open the folder
that contains our code.
We're going to right click
open with Google Chrome.
And now I'm going to set this up by
moving our reference design to the
bottom like this so that it's
easier for us to copy it with css.
I'm just going to move that to the
corner and then we can work here.
So first, let's work on
creating the subscribe button.
So just like we learned before, we're
going to create a button using H T M L,
so less than button, greater than,
and then insider button. We're
going to have the text subscribe.
And now let's save and refresh our
page. And now we have our button.
Next we're going to start changing the
appearance of this button so that it
looks like the subscribe
button from YouTube.
Let's go into our code and we're going
to start writing some CSS to change the
appearance of this H T M L
element. So to write css,
we have to create a new
element called a style element.
So this style element is unique in that
it doesn't appear visibly on the page.
So for example, if we save our
file and then we reload the page,
the style element doesn't
actually create anything.
So the purpose of this element is that
inside this element we can write CSS code
which modifies the appearance
of other elements. For example,
let's write our first bit of CSS
code. We're going to type button
open squiggly bracket,
close squiggly bracket.
And then inside these brackets,
we're basically going to give instructions
to the computer on how to modify the
appearance. For example,
we can set the background dash color
red and semicolon.
So make sure that you write this out
exactly as I have it here so that we're
following the syntax rules for css.
So let's save this file
and refresh our page.
And now you can see that we set the
background color of the button to red.
So as you can see, c s
s is similar to H T M L.
We're simply giving instructions to the
computer and then the computer follows
our instructions step by step.
And just like H T M L,
we have to follow certain syntax
rules when writing our CSS so that
the computer understands our code.
So what are the syntax rules for
css? How does this code work?
So the word at the front here
is called a CSS selector.
It tells a computer which elements on
the page we are targeting with our CSS
code. In this case,
we are targeting all buttons on the
page and we're going to change the
background color of all
buttons on the page to red.
Now, inside these brackets, there are
other rules that we have to follow.
The text to the left of this
colon is called the CSS property.
It tells a computer what we are
changing to the right of the colon
is the CSS value. It tells a computer
what we're changing the property to.
In this case, we're changing the
property background color to red,
and that's exactly what the computer did.
The colon is here to just separate the
property and the value and the
semicolon here is just like a period in
English. In English, you end
sentences with a period in css,
you end a style with a semicolon.
So that's what all of this syntax means.
So we can actually add multiple
styles inside these brackets.
So let's go ahead and add another style.
We're going to change the text
color to white to match this design.
So the property for changing
the text color is called color.
So notice that it's not called text color,
it's just something that
we have to remember.
We're going to change it to white
and we'll end it with as semicolon.
Let's save and refresh.
And now you can see that we change the
text color of this button to white.
And that's basically how c s s works.
We tell the computer what we're targeting
and then we give some styles and the
computer is going to apply
these styles one by one.
So let's do another example. This
time we'll set the border property.
So notice that our button has a border
while the subscribe button here doesn't
have a border. So we're going
to set the border property
colon two, none,
and we're going to save
this file and refresh.
And now we just remove the border.
So if you look at our styles here,
it's actually pretty straightforward.
They're pretty easy to read.
We set the background color to red,
text color to white and border to none.
So just like html, CSS is
pretty straightforward.
We're essentially just giving
the computer instructions.
So the general technique for going
from something that looks like this to
something that looks like this is to
just change these styles one by one.
So we're going to continue changing
styles one by one until we get our design
here.
The next style I'm going to change is
the height. So our button's a little bit
short, I'm going to make it taller.
So I'm going to set the height
to something like 50 px.
The PX here represents pixels.
Pixels are a very common unit of
measurement in the digital world,
image sizes are measured in pixels,
video sizes are measured in pixels,
and your screen sizes also
measured in pixels. In this case,
we're going to set the
button high, two 50 pixels.
And don't worry too much about
knowing what 50 pixels looks like.
The more that you write
CSS and work with pixels,
the more you get a sense for how big
these measurements turn out to be.
So for now, let's save this
file and refresh the page.
And now we have a button
that is 50 pixels tall,
but it actually looks like
it's a little too tall.
So I'm going to change the heights
to something like 30 pixels,
and I'm going to refresh the page again,
and I actually want it to
be a little bit taller,
so I'm going to change it to maybe 36.
I'm going to
refresh and I think that
looks pretty good to me.
So you see that in css.
We do a lot of trial and error
to get our measurements right
Now let's keep working step by
step to get to our design. Next,
we're going to adjust the width.
So let's change this to
something like a hundred pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
I'm going to save it refresh,
and I think it looks a
little bit too small,
so I'm going to increase
it just a little bit. 1 0 5
and refresh. Okay, I think
that looks good enough for me.
Next we're going to change the background
color because currently our red is not
the same as our design.
So VS code has a really nice
feature which is a color picker.
So if we hover over this color box here,
it gives us access to a color picker
that we can pick another color with.
So I'm going to pick something that's
a little closer to what I see at the
bottom, and don't worry, it
doesn't have to be perfect.
I'm going to pick something like 200 0 0.
I'm going to save this and refresh. Okay,
so I think that looks close enough.
So you might be wondering
what this value means.
We went from a color of red to RGB
200 0 0.
So this RGB value is another
way of measuring color.
It's a more precise way of measuring
color than just using a word like red or
white.
So the way that RGB works is that pretty
much every color can be created using a
combination of red, green, and blue.
So that's what this syntax represents.
The R represents how much
red we have in this color.
G represents how much green
and B represents how much blue.
And these three numbers represent
how much red we have, how much green,
and how much blue. The minimum value
is zero and the maximum value is
255.
So if we removed all the red and
green and we just have maximum blue
and we save, that's going
to get us a blue color.
On the other hand, if we have all
green color and we get rid of the blue,
we're going to have a green color.
So this is basically how RGB works.
It's a combination of red, green, and
blue to create any color that we want.
Now, don't worry too much about
knowing what an RGB value looks like.
For example, if you have a random value
like this, if you gave this to me,
I wouldn't even know what this color was.
Usually I just use the color picker to
pick the color that I want and then it
will give me the RGB value that I need.
The only RGB values I suggest
you remember are if we set
all the colors to the
maximum value. So 2 55, 2 55,
and 2 55, this creates white.
So we save it and refresh
that creates white.
If we set all of these three to zero,
that creates black and we refresh,
that creates a black color.
So now let's go back
to what we had before,
which I think was 200 0 0,
and we'll save and refresh.
And the next thing we're
going to change is here.
We might not be able to see
it, but if we zoom in here,
this button has rounded corners
while our button has pointy corners.
So to make rounded corners,
the CSS property for doing that is border
dash radius, and the border
radius takes a pixel measurement.
The higher the pixels, the more round
the corners will be. So for now,
let's try colon two pixels and save.
Now if we refresh the page,
our button now has rounded
corners just like our design.
So I'm going to zoom back
out and zoom back out.
So the last thing I'm going to change
is if we hover over this button,
you'll notice that our mouse
turns into this sort of hand.
This hand is called a pointer.
So we're going to change
the cursor, the mouse.
This thing that you point around
is usually called the cursor,
and we're going to change
the cursor to a pointer.
Let's save and refresh.
And that's how you get this hand
whenever your mouse is over this button.
So that's basically how we go from a
basic HTML button to something that
looks more professional. We
create the button with html,
and then we set the styles one by
one. Now you might be wondering,
how do I know all of these CSS properties?
How are you supposed to
memorize all of these?
So usually when I don't know the CSS
property for something, for example,
if I want to create rounded corners,
I would go to Google and search
something like CSS and what I
want to do, so let's say
I want round corners,
and usually the first few links
give some really good suggestions
on what the property is. So here,
right away we have the border radius
property in the first link and it gives
us some sample code that we can use.
So that's how I discover
all of the CSS properties.
I look at a design and I ask myself, okay,
what do I need to achieve this design?
And then I search for it in Google.
So don't worry. As you
use CSS more and more,
you're going to have to Google things
that you don't know and you're just get
used to the process of finding
answers by searching for them.
But for the purposes of this course,
I'm going to give you a lot of these
CSS properties so that you can get some
good practice with them.
The next step we're going to
do is to copy this join button.
So let's create a new button
on our page with html,
and this is going to be the join button.
So we're going to put the
text join inside this button,
let's save it and refresh.
And unfortunately,
it looks like our join button
looks like the subscribe button,
and that's because in our C s s,
this word button means that all
of these styles are targeted
to all buttons on the page.
So how do we get these styles to
only target the subscribe button?
So we're going to learn a new HTML
attribute that we can use for this.
So remember in the previous lesson
we learned that attributes modify the
behavior of elements. In this lesson,
we're going to learn a very useful
attribute that is used a lot in css.
We're going to go to
the opening tag again,
and we're going to add a new
attribute called the class attribute.
So we're going to type
class equals quotes. Quotes.
So the class attribute basically
lets us label HTML elements.
For example, let's label this
button the subscribe button.
And also my code is getting
a little long for this line,
so I'm going to put the text on a
new line to make it easier to read.
So remember, according to HTML syntax,
these extra spaces don't matter.
They're ignored. So now that
we set the class attribute,
we've essentially set a label to this
button and we can target this label in
our css. So to target a class in css,
we can start with a dot, and then
we're going to type out the class name.
So we're going to type
out subscribe dash button.
So according to CSS syntax, if
we start this code with a dot,
that means we're going to target a class
name instead of an element name like
button.
So here we're going to start targeting
just any element that has the class
subscribe button.
So if we save and refresh now
you'll see that all of these
styles only apply to elements
that have the class subscribe,
and our join button does not
have any of these styles. Now,
multiple elements can have these
same class. So for example,
if I set the class of the join
button to subscribe dash button,
all these styles will be applied to any
element with the subscribe button class.
That's what this dot means.
And that means these are going
to be applied to this and this.
So if we save and refresh,
now the join button has these styles
again because it has a class of subscribe
button. But for our purposes,
we actually want this to have
a different set of styles.
So let's give a different
class to the join button.
We're going to give the class join,
and I'm also going to reformat my code
a little to make it easier to read.
So let's save and refresh.
And now we're back to where we can
start modifying our join button.
Now let's start styling our join button
to match our design. So remember,
the general strategy is to create
the element with HTML like this and
then style it one by one
until you match your design.
So first we're going to target the
class. That's what this dot means.
We're going to target the
class join dash button. Okay,
so let's set the background
dash color to white.
Let's save it and refresh. And next,
let's deal with the border.
So our border is a little bit gray.
We can set it to maybe
border dash color to
blue, and let's see how that
looks. Let's save it and refresh.
Okay, so it looks a little darker
than what we have in our design.
Let's go into our color picker
and pick a more accurate color.
So I'm just going to do this by eye.
Don't worry if it's not totally accurate.
We're just trying to get
something that's close enough.
I'm going to go over here and
I'm going to pick something like
maybe something like this.
Let's save it refresh,
and that's a little bit too dark.
So I'm going to pick something
a little bit lighter,
save it and refresh. Okay,
I think that's pretty good. But we
also noticed that our border's a little
weird. So on the top it looks like it's
a darker, it's a lighter shade of blue,
and at the bottom it's kind of a
darker shade of blue. So to fix that,
we're going to set the border style to be
a solid color.
Let's save this and refresh.
And now we get a solid color all around.
The next thing we can change is our border
looks a little bit thick compared to
the design, so we're going to
change the border dash width.
So you'll see that a lot of these
styles are pretty self-explanatory.
So we're going to set the border
width to let's say one pixel.
Let's save it and refresh.
Okay, so that looks pretty good.
Next we're going to set the tex color.
So we're going to set the tex color to
blue and have it the same as our border.
So remember, the property to set
Tex color is called color colon,
and we're going to copy
this color down here,
save it and refresh. Okay, so that looks,
it's a little light,
but I think it's okay.
Now we're going to set
the height and the width.
So let's set the height to be
something like 36 pixels to
match our subscribe button
refresh. Okay, and now we're
going to set the width.
So let's try, I don't know, 60 pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
Save and refresh. Okay,
I'm going to set it to maybe 62.
Okay, let's save and refresh. And again,
we're going to set some rounded corners.
So that is border dash radius,
two pixels. We're going
to save it and refresh.
And now we're almost there
to matching this design.
The last one we're going to set is
cursor pointer to get that nice hand
pointer when we're
hovering over the button.
So refresh now when we're
hovering over the join button,
we have this nice pointer icon.
So another thing we notice is that
there's a lot of space between these two
buttons and there's not a
lot of space between ours.
So in CSS space is called
margin. So to add space,
we're going to add some margin. So
let's go to the subscribe button styles.
And we're going to add
some margin dash, right?
So we're going to add some margin or
some space to the right of this button.
And we're going to set this
space to maybe eight pixels.
Let's see how that
looks. Save and refresh,
and that looks pretty good to me. So
now we're done with the join button.
Lastly, we're going to create this tweet
button. Let's go back into our code.
And remember, our general
technique is to number one,
create the element with
html, and then number two,
style it with CSS one by one.
So we're going to create
a button with a text
tweet. I'm going to move my editor a
little bit to the right here so we can see
it. I'll move this here as well.
And let's refresh your page.
So now this button has the same style
as a join button because it has a join
button class, and that's
being targeted up here.
So instead of the join button,
we're going to give a class
or a label of tweet button.
Now save and refresh. And now
we're back to the default styles.
So in our css, we're going to write some
code. We're going to target the class.
So we start with a dot. To target a class,
we're going to target
the tweet button class.
So just like our other buttons,
we're going to adjust the style of this
button one by one until we match our
design. So let's start off
with the background dash color.
That set us to blue to start off with.
Now I'm going to try my best to match
the Twitter blue that we have here.
So I'm going to pick something like this,
and I think that looks pretty good.
Save it and refresh. Okay,
we'll leave it like that for
now. We might adjust it later.
Let's change the color now to white.
So that'll change the text color. Okay,
let's get rid of the border
refresh and save.
Let's give it a height of 36
pixels to match our other buttons.
And the color's a little bit off, so
I'm going to adjust it just a bit.
Maybe it should be a
little more like this.
Save it refresh. Okay, I'm
pretty happy with this.
Now we're going to
adjust the width to maybe
105. Let's see how that looks.
Okay, that's a little too
much. Let's adjust it to 80.
Let's adjust it to 70. So as you can see,
there's a lot of trial and error
when we're working with c s s. Now,
to get this rounded effect,
we can set a border radius.
Let's start with two pixels. If we
refresh, we get rounded corners.
If we start increasing the pixels for the
border radius, let's save and refresh.
It starts getting rounder and rounder.
So the trick to getting these
round buttons is we have
to set the border radius
to half the height or the width,
whichever is lower. So in this case,
the height is 36. If we set the borderer
radius to half of that, which is 18,
save and refresh. That's how
we get this rounded color.
The last thing we're going to
do is to bold the text in here.
So in our design, this tweet
text here is very bold,
so we're going to make our
font bold as well. So do that.
We're going to set this
property called font dash. Wait,
I'm going to set it to
bold save and refresh.
Okay, looks pretty good.
It looks like this font is
actually a little bigger than ours.
So let's actually set the font dash size,
set it to maybe 15, see how that looks,
save and refresh. Okay, I
think that looks pretty close.
I'm going to change the width to maybe 74.
See how that looks? Okay, so
I think this is good enough.
Currently we're just trying
to copy things by eye. Later.
I'll show you a technique of how to copy
these colors and measurements exactly,
but for now,
it's good enough to be able to achieve
these designs just by looking at them.
So the last thing for this button
is to add the cursor pointer.
Let's save it and refresh. So
if we hover over this button,
we now get a nice pointer for our cursor.
So the last thing I'm going to adjust
here is the spacing between
these two buttons. Remember,
spacing and CSS is called margin.
So we're going to add to
the join button. Actually,
let's add it to the tweet button just
for practice. We're going to add spacing.
So we're going to add margin
to the left colon,
and let's make it eight pixels like
we had it for the subscribe button.
Let's save it and
refresh. And there we go.
So we took our basic buttons and we
were able to copy these really nice
looking designs just by looking at them.
And the technique that we use for doing
this is first we create the element with
html,
and then we style it with CSS one by
one until it looks close enough to
our design.
So here are a bunch of exercises from
other popular websites that you can try
out for yourself.
This is a good challenge for you to be
able to look at a website by I and use
CSS to copy the styles that you see.
In this lesson, we're going to
learn some intermediate CSS skills,
such as how to create hovers,
transitions and shadows.
For most buttons you see on the internet,
if we hover over them with our mouse,
they change their style slightly,
some of them get darker,
some of them get lighter. We're going
to learn how to do that in our code.
So we're going to use the same
exercise as before. As a reminder,
you can find it at super
simple.dev/exercises/buttons.
These buttons, when we hover over
them, they actually change their style.
So this is going to help us practice
learning about hovers. In addition,
you'll notice that if we hover in and out,
they change their style smoothly so
we can also learn about transitions.
And lastly, this tweet
button, if we hover over it,
it casts a little bit of a shadow,
so that'll help us practice shadows.
But first, let's work on the hover
styles for the subscriber button.
Let's go into our code and find the
styles for the subscribe button,
which is everything here. And
now to create a hover effect,
we're going to create a new block of css.
We're going to use a.to target a class.
So this time we're still targeting
the subscribe dash button,
but this time we're going to
add colon hover, open bracket,
close bracket.
So inside these are styles that will
apply only when we hover over the button.
That's what this colon
hover means. For example,
we can set the background
dash color two green.
Now let's save our file
and refresh the page.
And when we hover over this button,
you'll notice that it's green.
So the way that this works is
that if we are not hovering over,
all of these styles apply. So
the background color is red.
If we are hovering over the button,
these styles now apply in
addition to these styles.
So we're essentially adding
extra styles when we hover.
So this colon hover is
known as a pseudo class.
It basically adds extra styles in a
certain situation. So in this case,
it's going to add extra
styles when we hover.
Another example of a pseudo
class is dot subscribe button
colon active.
So the active pseudo class activates
when we click on the element.
So when we click on the button, we can
set the background dash color to blue.
Let's save this and refresh.
Now when we hover over,
we're going to apply these styles. So the
background color is going to be green,
and then when we click, we're
going to apply the active styles,
and then the background
color is going to be blue.
So let's look at our design and see
what kind of hover styles we have.
Let's refresh. So when we hover
over our subscribe button,
it seems to turn a little bit
more light, and if we click it,
it becomes even lighter.
So the way to make our button lighter is
using a new property that I'm going to
introduce. So let's get rid of these
for now. Let's save and refresh.
So we got rid of those
pseudo classs styles.
We're going to set a CSS
property called opacity.
So opacity tells us how
SeeThrough and HTML element is.
It takes a value between zero and one.
A value of one means that this
element is completely normal.
So if we save this and refresh, you
can see that if we hover over it,
it's completely normal. And
as we decrease the opacity,
let's decrease it to 0.7.
The elements start to fade.
So if we decrease it even more to 0.3
refresh, now it's even more faded.
So the opacity is used
to fade out an element.
If we go from one to zero, the
element's going to fade out.
So if we said it's a zero and refresh,
now it's basically completely
transparent and see through.
If the opacity goes from zero to one,
that means the element's
going to start to fade in.
So that's how opacity works
for now. If we hover over it,
let's set the opacity to maybe 0.8.
So it's going to be a little bit see
through, but not totally see through.
So let's refresh and hover over it. Okay,
let's look at our design. So that looks
pretty close to what we have next,
let's set the active styles. So in
our design, if we click on this,
it gets even lighter. So we're going to
set an even lower opacity to make our
button fade out even
more. When we click on it,
let's set it to something like 0.4
or 0.5. Let's say save it and refresh.
Now when we hover over
it, now when we click,
the button gets lighter and we
can compare that to our design,
and that looks pretty good to me.
Now we're going to work on the
hover styles for our join button.
So if we look at our design, the colors
for this drawing button sort of inverts.
So the background color and the text
color, they reverse. So to do that,
we're going to go into
our code, and again,
we're going to target the
join button with a dot join
button.
And we're going to add a pseudo
class called colon hover.
And now all the styles inside here will
apply when we hover over this button.
So when we hover over it, we
want to invert the colors.
So we want to set the
background dash color to
our text color, which is this
copy paste.
And we also want to set the text
color to our background color.
So we're going to switch them
up. Let's copy paste here,
save it and refresh.
And now when we hover over our join
button, that looks pretty good.
The next thing is when
we click the join button,
you'll notice that it also fades out.
So we're going to add an active
pseudo class to this button as well.
So target the join button class
and add a pseudo class called
active.
So these styles will activate
when we click this element.
So let's set the opacity to maybe 0.7,
maybe save it, refresh, click it. Okay,
so I think that looks close
enough. So 0.7 looks pretty good.
So that is how we set hover styles and
other pseudo classes with our CSS code.
Next, we're going to learn
how to transition smoothly
between these two styles.
So for example, if we go back into our
project and we hover over this button,
you notice that the background color
and the text color change smoothly,
but for our colors, it
changes almost instantly.
So how do we make this
transition? So to do that,
we're going to scroll up to
our subscribe button. First,
we're going to add a
property called transition.
So transition property takes two values.
The first one is what we want
to transition. So in our case,
we want to transition
the opacity smoothly.
So we want to smoothly fade out the
button when we hover over it instead of
instantaneously. So let's
transition the opacity.
And the second value is how
long this transition will take.
For example, let's set it to
one s, which is one second,
end it with a semicolon and
save. Let's go back and refresh.
And now when we hover over our button,
you'll notice that the
opacity changes smoothly.
Now it might be a little bit hard to see,
so let's change this to
0.1 to show you the effect
refresh.
So now you can see that the opacity
is changing smoothly over one second.
So this is how you transition between
different styles when you're hovering over
them. Now let's set it back to 0.8,
and we're going to change one second
because it's a little bit too long.
So usually a good transition
duration is something like
0.15 seconds. So it's pretty fast,
but it's not too fast
and it's not too slow.
Let's go to our webpage and
refresh. Now when we hover over it,
we get a nice smooth transition. It
might be a little bit hard to tell,
but we do get a nice smooth transition
instead of what we had before,
which transitioned immediately.
Let's work on the join button now.
So this one is a lot easier
to see the difference.
Let's scroll down to the
join button. And again,
we're going to add a transition.
So we're going to add transition,
and we're going to give it two values,
what we want to transition and how long.
First,
let's transition the background
dash color and how long we're
going to transition for
one second. As an example,
let's save our file and refresh. Now,
when we hover over the join button,
the background color changes
smoothly over one second,
but you notice that the tax
color changes immediately,
whereas the tax color here
also kind of transitions.
So to make the tax color
transition as well,
we need to add another
property to transition.
So we can actually transition
multiple properties.
We just have to separate it with a
comma. So if we have a comma here,
we can add another property
to transition. This time,
I'm going to transition the color, and
we're also going to give it a duration,
which is one second. So how long it
takes to transition this property,
save it, and refresh. Now,
when we hover over this button,
it will transition both background
color and the color smoothly over one
second.
And that's basically how transitions work.
So sometimes you might be tempted to
put this transition property into the
hover because you think that we
want to transition when we hover,
so we have to put it here. Now, the
problem with this is that if we refresh,
when we hover over the
button, everything looks good.
But as soon as we hover out,
these styles change immediately.
And that's because remember, these
styles only apply when we're hovering.
So if we are hovering,
then we have a transition.
But as soon as we take off the hover,
it's the same thing as
having no transition at all.
So that's one common pitfall
of the transition property.
So let's move it back
here where it should be.
So just make sure that you put the
transition always in sort of base CSS
style.
The last thing we're going to learn in
this lesson is how to create shadows.
If we go to our project and we look at
our design, I'm going to zoom in here.
When I hover over the tweet button, it
creates a faint shadow under the button.
So we're going to learn how to create
this. So let's zoom out for now.
We're going to go down to
the tweet button styles,
and the shadow is just
another CSS property.
So the property for a
shadow is box dash shadow
colon. Now, box shadow
actually takes four values.
So I'm going to set the
values to zero for now,
and then we're going to change them
one by one to see how they work.
Let's save this and refresh.
And now we do have a shadow,
but we can't see it because it's
right underneath the button.
So the first value here determines
the horizontal position of the shadow.
For example, I can set it
to 10 pixels, and if I save,
the shadow will appear
10 pixels to the right.
The second value sets the vertical
position of the shadow. For example,
if I set it to 10 pixels
in the second value,
it will push a 10 pixels down.
So now you can see we actually do have
a shadow 10 pixels to the right and 10
pixels down from the button.
Now the third value here is the blur.
So if we set the blur to maybe 10 pixels,
save and refresh, now the
shadow becomes blurred,
and the last valley is
obviously the color.
So we can actually change
it to whatever we want.
We can actually change it to
something like red, save it refresh,
and we get a red shadow.
So this is basically how shadows work.
We have a horizontal position,
a vertical position, blur
and color. So don't worry,
the more that you work with shadows,
the more you'll get familiar with
what these four values can do.
So let's try creating a
more realistic shadow.
Usually shadows aren't red or any color.
They're usually kind of a darker
shade of whatever they're covering.
So to create a color like that,
we're going to need a new way of
measuring color. So let's get rid of this,
and we're going to use
something called R G B A.
Rrg. B A is the same thing as rrgb,
except there's an A value.
So this a value essentially
means the opacity of the color,
how SeeThrough it is.
We can set the RGB 2, 0, 0, 0.
That gets us to black as we learned.
And then the fourth value is our A
value. If we set it to one and save,
this is going to be pure black.
But as we decrease a value,
the color is going to get more and more
faded out and more and more transparent.
So if we decrease it to 0.6,
save and refresh.
Now this color is getting more
transparent and faded out.
So a pretty natural color for
shadow is something pretty faint,
like 0.15. So for shadows,
we usually don't want
it to be too noticeable.
Shadows are best when they're very subtle.
And now we kind of want to move the shadow
a little bit closer to the button so
it looks a little more natural.
So let's actually move it
maybe five pixels and five
pixels. Let's see how that
looks. Save it and refresh. Okay,
I think that looks pretty good.
So that's how we create a natural looking
shadow with the box shadow property.
We have four values, the horizontal
position, vertical position, the blur,
and the color measured.
With R G B A,
the value means opacity or
how C through this color is.
The final step of this lesson is to only
make this shadow appear when we hover
over the button. So for example,
for here, if we hover over,
we can see the shadow. If
we're not, the shadow's gone.
So this is another style of
button that we can create.
So let's use what we
learned so far. Remember,
we first use a.to target the class.
So we're going to target
the tweet dash button class.
We're going to add a pseudo
class here called hover,
and then we're going to move our
shadow into the hover pseudo class.
Let's cut and paste in here.
So remember, the way this works
is that let's refresh first.
If we are not hovering over the
button, we get all of these styles.
If we are hovering over the button,
we're going to get these styles,
these hover styles,
as well as all of these. So these
styles get added on when we hover.
So now when we refresh and
we hover over this button,
we're going to get a pretty
subtle shadow. It's not perfect,
but I think it's close
enough to what we want.
Now the last thing we're going to
do is to transition the shadow.
So we can actually transition the
shadow pretty easily by just adding the
transition property,
and we're going to tell it what we
want to transition and how long.
So you want to transition
the box dash shadow,
and let's transition it to something
natural, like 0.15 seconds.
Now save and refresh. Now,
when we hover over this button,
we get a nice transition
on the shadow like this.
All right,
so the last thing we're going to do
is I realize I forgot to change the
durations here.
So let's change it to 0.15 and 0.15.
Let's save it and refresh.
So now this looks something like
what we have in our designs.
So we just learned some
intermediate H C M L skills,
such as creating hover effects,
other pseudo classes, transitions,
and shadows.
Here are some more exercises from famous
websites that you can try to copy.
This time. We're also going
to copy the hover styles.
As always, you can find these solutions
and more exercises below the video.
In this lesson,
we're going to learn about one of the
most useful tools for web development
called the Chrome Dev Tools,
and we're going to use the dev tools
to get perfect colors for our buttons.
So first of all, what
are the Chrome dev tools?
So I find that it's all easier to
demonstrate it than to try to explain it.
So let's go to our website
and we're going to click in an
empty area and we're going to click
inspect, and this will
open up the dev tools.
So the cool thing about this is that we
can now see all the HTML on our page.
If we draw down here, we
can see all the buttons.
So this is a great way to visualize the
HTML as well as the CSS on our page.
If I click into one of these buttons,
I can see all the CSS that is
applied to this button. So what's
better is that we can open the dev
tools in any website that we want,
so we can actually open
it in super simple.dev
and you can see all the HTML that is
on this website as well as all the
css.
So this is a really great tool where
you can open it in any website that you
want and see the exact styles that
they're using on that website.
The next feature I want to show you
is this pointer icon in the top left.
So instead of trying to find
these buttons in all of this html,
we can actually click this pointer
icon and it will let us hover over any
element on the webpage
and show it down here.
So if we hover over this
tweet button and click it,
it will find the element
for us in the html.
And now we can look at these styles
here to see what kind of styles and more
importantly,
what kind of background color is set on
this button so that we can get a perfect
background color. So one thing to
note is that this background color is
actually another way of measuring color.
So currently we learned about rgb.
Now we have another way of measuring
color, and this is called hex.
It's basically the same as rgb.
The first two characters here,
one in D represent how much red. The
second two represent how much green,
and the third two represent how much
blue. So with a little bit of math,
we can convert from hex to rgb.
So I just google a hex
to RGB calculator and I
find any calculator and
then I use it to convert
the hex value.
So I'm going to copy this into
the calculator and then convert it
and it will give me the RGB value,
so it'll do that math for me.
So that's just another way of
measuring color called hex.
The next feature I want to show you in
the dev tools is this computer tab. So
this tab actually shows us all the
final styles that are applied to this
element.
So we can actually scroll down here and
we can find the background color in the
RGB value.
We can also find things like the height,
the final calculated height,
the final calculated width so that we
can get the perfect size as well as the
perfect background color.
So let's actually just use
the background color here,
and we're going to copy this
and paste this into our code.
So we're going to get an exact color
instead of trying to guess it like we were
before. So if I copy
and paste here, save it,
and now refresh.
Now our button has the exact
same color as what we have here.
So the same thing happens
for the join button.
Let's click this icon here and hover
over the join button to find it in the
html click. And now we
can see all these styles,
all the final computed styles on the
join button. So most importantly,
we can find the order
color, which is this.
Let's go into,
let's copy it and put it into our CSS
so that we can get a perfect color.
End it with a semicolon to
follow the syntax rules.
Copy it there and copy it here.
Now we're going to save refresh,
and now our button color is going
to match the design. Exactly.
So that's how you use the dev tools
to get perfect color for our HTML
elements.
Now we're going to learn
about the CSS box model,
which basically allows us to add space
between our elements like this as well as
add space inside our
element to make it bigger.
The first part of the box model is
spacing on the outside of the element.
This is called margin.
If we look at our code,
we already worked with margin before here.
We set the margin right to eight pixels.
That means that we added space on the
outside of the button on the right of
eight pixels. If we change the margin
right to 30 pixels for example,
and save and refresh. Now there's
30 pixels of space on the outside,
on the right side of the button. So we
can add margin to all four directions,
top right, bottom and left.
Let's try adding margin to
the left side of the button.
This time we're going to add
margin left of 20 pixels,
save it and refresh.
And that adds space on the outside of
the button on the left of 20 pixels.
So that's basically how margin works.
It lets us add spacing on
the outside of the element.
The second part of the box model is
spacing on the inside of the element.
So basically all these spacing
in here around our text.
So currently if we look at our code,
we're setting the height
and width of our buttons.
And this is not actually a good idea.
I'll show you why.
I'm going to scroll down to the join
button because it's a little easier to
see and I'm going to
change the text to join my
channel, save it and refresh.
And you'll notice that the text is
actually overflowing the button like this,
and that's because if we scroll up,
we're setting the height and the width.
That means that we're forcing the button
to have a height of 36 pixels and a
width of 62 pixels. But here,
notice that our content is too big.
So what we want to do is to
remove these lines and save it
and refresh the page. And by default,
our button actually adjusts the size
automatically based on the content.
So now instead of setting
the height and the width,
we're going to achieve the same thing
by adding spacing on the inside of the
button.
So the spacing on the inside of the button
is called padding. Let's go into our
code and give it a try.
So we're going to add
padding dash left of 30
pixels, save it and refresh.
And you can see that padding add
spacing on the inside of the button.
And just like margin, we can set
padding in all four directions.
So let's try adding padding dash top
to 20 pixels, save that and refresh.
And now you can see that we added
padding on the top by 20 pixels.
So we can actually use the chrome dev
tools that we learned earlier to visualize
the margin and padding of our elements.
Let's go into a blank area of our webpage
and we're going to right click and
inspect and then click this top
left icon and then click our
subscribe button.
So I'm going to drag this down and then
we're going to go into the computed
tab.
So this section is basically the
box model. We have our margin,
which is a space on the
outside of the element.
You can see that highlighted
in orange. We have the border,
which we learned earlier,
and we have the padding,
which is the space on the
inside of the element,
which you can see highlighted
in green buttons by default,
have a padding of six pixels on the
left and right and one pixel on top and
bottom.
So let's click this top left again and
go to our drawing button and click this
button. In this example we have
padding on the top of 20 pixels,
which is what we have in our code. We
have padding on the left of 30 pixels,
also what we have in our code.
And then we have a default padding of
six pixels on the right and one pixel at
the bottom. And for this button we
have a border of one pixel wide,
which you can see here in our code.
So all of these combined
make up the c s s box model.
This basically determines how much space
and element takes up on the page and
how far it is away from other elements.
So now that we learned the box model,
we're going to use it to
recreate our design here.
So currently if we look at our
code, we're using height and width.
Let's replace this with the box model.
Let's get rid of this
and save it and refresh.
And now our buttons back
to what it was before.
And now we're going to add padding to
this button so that it matches the design
at the bottom here.
So let's add some padding dash top of 10
pixels.
So we'll add spacing on the inside of
the button at the top here of 10 pixels.
We're also going to add padding
dash bottom of 10 pixels.
So let's save that and refresh. Okay,
so now we have space at the top and
bottom, so that looks pretty close.
We're also going to add space on
the inside on the left, right?
So we're going to add
padding dash left of 16
pixels and padding on the right
of 16 pixels.
So let's save that and refresh.
And I think this looks close
enough. So using padding,
we added spacing on the
inside of our button.
And the good thing about this is that
if we change the text like this and save
it and refresh, the button
will resize with the text,
but it will keep the
spacing on the inside.
So using padding is a better
alternative to height and width.
So let's save that and refresh the page
and let's actually move these
buttons back closer together.
So currently if we scroll up,
we have margin on the right of 30 pixels.
So spacing on the
outside of the button on
the right of 30 pixels,
we're going to change back to eight
pixels so that it's closer like we have
in our design, save it and refresh. Okay,
so that looks pretty good.
Now one thing you'll notice is that our
buttons are not aligned with each other.
So the join button is all the way at
the top while our subscribe button is a
little bit below. So why is
this happening? By default,
the browser tries to align
our buttons based on the text.
So notice that the text
is in one line like this.
So that's the default
behavior of the browser.
This is because browsers in the
beginning were mostly text-based.
Now to override this behavior and
align everything to the top like we had
before,
we can go into our CSS and we're
going to add a property called
vertical dash Align,
and we're going to set this to top. So
instead of aligning the buttons based on
the text like this,
we're just going to align everything
to the top If we save that and
refresh. Now the subscribe
button is aligned to the top,
which is right there. Let's do the
same thing for the tweak button.
We're going to scroll down
and we're going to add
vertical dash align top here as well.
Save and refresh. And now
everything's aligned properly again.
Now let's work on the join button.
I'm going to scroll down and
remove this extra text here,
save it and refresh. And now we're going
to go to our CSS for the join button.
So I'll scroll up to right here and
we're going to adjust the padding.
So let's actually just borrow the padding
from the subscribe button because they
look pretty similar.
So I'll scroll up here
and copy these and just
move them down to the
joint button right here.
Save that and refresh. Okay,
so that looks pretty good,
except our joint button
looks a little bit off.
It looks a little bit taller
than our subscribe button,
and that's because the border actually
adds a little bit of size to this button,
so it adds one pixel
on the top and bottom.
That's why this button is taller than
the subscribe button. So to compensate,
we're actually going to reduce the
padding at the top and the bottom by one
pixel, say save it and refresh.
And now they're the same size. We have
nine pixels of space on the inside,
plus the one pixel of the border width,
and that matches the 10 pixels of space
on the inside of the subscribe button.
And I'll leave changing the tweet
button up to you as an exercise.
So that is a CSS box model.
Every element can have spacing on the
outside called margin space on the inside
called padding as well as a border.
And these properties determine how much
space and element takes up on the page.
Here's some exercises of using the box
model to get yourself more familiar with
this concept and these properties.
For most of the course, we've been
working with buttons. In this lesson,
we're going to work with text and
we're going to learn how to style text.
So just like our button lesson,
I've created an exercise that
we can practice with text.
So we're going to go to super
simple.dev/exercises/text.
And now we have some texts from YouTube
and Apple that we're going to learn how
to copy. So first of all,
let's create a new HTML file where
we can focus on practicing text
styles.
So I'm going to go here and create
a new file and let's just call this
text dot html.
And now we're going to open
this file in our browser.
So open the folder that contains
our code and right click
open with Google Chrome.
I'm actually going to put
this up here. All right,
so now we're ready to begin.
If you've ever written a text document
before using something like Google Docs
or Microsoft Word, you've
probably seen something like this.
This is a toolbar that allows us
to change the style of our text.
We can change the font, the text size,
we can make it bold, we can center it,
et cetera. In css, we have a
style for each of these things.
Let's go to our code and we're going to
first start by creating some text on our
page.
So let's first create a paragraph
and then insider paragraph.
Let's start with the text here.
So I'm going to copy and
paste this into our paragraph,
and I'm just going to reorganize
the code a little bit and save.
Remember that in H T M L, these extra
spaces and new lines don't matter.
Now refresh the page and we have our
first paragraph that we can practice with.
Next, let's create a style element
so we can write some CSS code.
Now we'll set a class on this paragraph
so that we can target it in CSS
class equals video dash title because
this is a video title that
I copied from YouTube.
So let's save it and refresh.
And now we can start targeting
this paragraph in our css.
So remember, we're going to
start with a.to target a class,
and we're going to
target video dash title.
So the first thing we're going to
change is the font to change the
font. The CSS property
is font dash family.
So websites by default use the
font called Times New Roman.
We're going to change the
font to a font called aerial,
save it and refresh. And now
you can see we changed the font.
Let's go to the next one.
So this is the font size and we can
change the font size using the property
font dash size,
and let's change it to
something like 30 pixels,
save it and refresh.
And now we have a bigger font.
The next example is, let's make it bold.
We're going to go here and we're
going to set the font dash weight
to be bold,
save it and refresh. And
now we have bold font.
So as you can see, CSS has properties
for doing all of these things,
and for most of these properties it's
pretty easy to Google them. For example,
let's Google for how
to make a font italic.
So we'll go to Google and we just
need to search something like css,
text italic. And now in the first result,
we're going to go in here,
and if you scroll down,
you can see this CSS font style italic.
So I'm going to copy this
and paste it in my code,
save it and refresh. And
now we have italic text.
The last one I'm going to show you for
now is how to center this text because in
our exercise we have an exercise
where the text is centered to center
text. We're going to go to our code
and we're going to type text dash a
line.
So this is the property for centering
text or putting it to the left or to the
right. Now we're going to
give a value of center,
save it and refresh, and
that's how we center our text.
So that was pretty easy right now let's
go ahead and try to copy this style in
our exercise. So if you remember,
the general strategy for creating
anything that we see is first create the
element with HTML and then
style it with CSS one by one.
Let's go ahead and do
that for this exercise.
So I'm just going to resize this
back and we're going to start
by resetting all of these
styles, save it and refresh.
First I'm going to start with the
font family. So for this exercise,
I actually use the font family aerial
just to make it easier for us. So we're
going to set the font dash family to
aerial, save it and refresh.
Next, I'm going to change the font weight.
So this font is bold and I want
to make my font bold as well.
So I'm going to add
font, dash weight, bold,
save it, and refresh. Next,
let's change the font size.
So I'm going to change this
font size to something bigger,
like maybe 20 pixels,
save it and refresh.
And it looks a little too
big comparing to the design.
So let's tone it down just a
little bit. Maybe 18 pixels,
save and refresh. Okay, so I
think that looks close enough.
Next, you'll notice that this text
sort of wraps around to a second line,
while ours doesn't.
The way to make this happen is we're
going to set a width on this title. Now,
I know that in the previous section
we said it's bad to set a width,
but here it's actually what we
want because if we set a width,
we're going to force the text onto a
second line. So let's go ahead and set a
width right now,
and I'll set it to something like
400 pixels. Let's see how that looks.
Save it and refresh. Okay, so
it needs to be less than that.
Let's do 300 pixels,
save and refresh. Okay,
so that looks right to me now.
And the final thing with the title is I
notice there's more spacing between the
lines here than what we have.
So to adjust the spacing between lines,
the property is called line dash height.
So don't worry if it seems like we're
learning a lot of new properties.
The point of this lesson is for us to
go through some complicated examples
together,
which will prepare you for the exercises
that you can practice on your own.
So for this line height, let's
try something like 20 pixels,
save it and refresh. Okay,
so it looks like that didn't work.
Let's change it to 26,
maybe save it and refresh. Okay,
maybe 24, save and refresh. Okay,
so I think that looks pretty close.
Next, let's work on the second paragraph.
So we're going to create a new paragraph,
3.4 M views.
And now to create this dot,
we're going to create something
called an HTML entity.
So an HTML entity lets us type out
special characters, for example,
this dot and this check mark to get
the H html entity. For this dot,
we're going to Google html entity
middle dot. And now if we scroll down,
this will give us some HTML code
that we can copy into our code.
So I'm going to copy this
and then paste it here.
And that's going to
create a dot on our page.
So if I save it and
refresh, that's what we get.
Now I'm going to type out the rest
of the text in this paragraph.
Now save that and refresh.
So now remember the general process
is we created the element with html.
Now we're going to style
it one by one. First,
let's give this a class
so we can target it.
Let's call this video dash stats.
And now in our S, we're
going to style this text.
We're going to start with
font, dash family, aerial,
save, and refresh. And then we're
going to change the font size.
So it looks like our design is a
little bit smaller than what we have.
Let's change the font
size to maybe 14 pixels,
save and refresh, and I think
that looks pretty close.
Next, let's change the color.
So let's set a color of maybe gray
and refresh. Okay, so
that's a little too light.
So to get an exact color,
we can right click in a blank area
of the webpage, click inspect,
and then we're going to inspect
the styles of this element.
So the trick to doing that is we're
going to click this top left icon,
hover over this element and click it.
And then we can find all its
styles in the computer tab.
So if we scroll down, we
can get the text color.
So let's copy this and save.
Let's refresh. And that looks
pretty good compared to the design.
Next, let's adjust the spacing
between these two paragraphs.
So remember from the previous lesson,
the spacing outside of an
element is called the margin,
but if we look at our code, we
didn't actually set any margin yet.
So why is there so much space
between these two paragraphs?
And the reason is if we write,
click in an empty area of the
webpage and click inspect,
And we click this icon
And hover over this paragraph.
This paragraph already has
margin at the top and bottom.
So if we click this,
go to computed as 14 pixels of
margin at the top and 14 at the
bottom. And the same
thing for this paragraph.
And the reason for this is
because paragraphs by default
come with margin at the
top and at the bottom.
So that's why there's all this spacing
that we have here where we didn't set it
in the css.
So the general process is we're
going to remove the default spacing,
and then we're going to set our own
spacing. So let's go into our code,
and first we're going to
remove the margin dash bottom
of the title, set that to zero,
and we're also going to remove
the margin at the top of the
second paragraph and set it to zero,
save that and refresh.
And now there's no default spacing
between these and they're really close
together. Next, we can set a
more precise margin bottom.
So let's set it to maybe 20
pixels. Let's see how that looks.
Save it and refresh. Okay,
so let's way too much space.
Let's tone it down to
something like maybe five,
save and refresh. Okay,
so I think this looks pretty
close to the design actually.
Let's move on to the next paragraph.
We're going to move all the way down
and create a new paragraph element with
this text inside.
And now for this check mark, we're
also going to use an HTML entity.
Now I know that you can actually copy
this and put it into our code directly,
but some browsers might not support this,
so that's why we're using HTML entities.
We're going to go to Google and we're
going to search HTML entity check
mark.
And I'm going to scroll down
and grab the HTML entity here.
So here we actually have three. I'm
just going to take the first one, copy,
paste, save it. Let's go back and refresh.
Okay, so that looks pretty good. Next,
let's keep styling these one by one.
So I'm going to go a little bit faster
here because it's basically the same
thing that we've been
doing for the first two.
It's called this one video author,
and then we'll style it up here.
So we'll set the font family to your
aerial, like the rest of the paragraphs.
Going to set the color to
the same as this paragraph,
it's a copy and paste.
Okay, that looks pretty good. Oh yeah,
we have to set the font size
looks a little too big right now.
Set the font size to 14 pixels.
Next we're going to
reset the default spacing here.
So we're going to set the margin dash
bottom and remove it by setting it
to zero, and also remove the margin top
and set it to zero, save and refresh.
And now we're going to
set a more precise margin.
So let's try maybe 30
pixels, see how that looks.
Okay, that's way too much.
Maybe 20 pixels. Okay,
I think that looks about right. Then
we're going to do the third paragraph.
Let's go down here,
create the element and
then style of it with css.
I'm just going to copy
and paste this in here,
save and refresh.
First, let's give a class to the
text so that we can target it.
Let's call this video dash description.
Go up here, video dash description.
We want a font family of aerial,
a font size
of 14 pixels and the same color,
and we save it and refresh.
Okay, that looks pretty good.
And now we want to give it a width
to make it wrap around like this.
So let's set the width to the
same as the title, which is 300
with 300 pixels,
save and refresh. Okay,
so it looks like this IO is
actually on a separate line.
Let's make it two 80,
save and refresh. All right,
so that looks pretty good,
and I'm also going to make it two 80 up
here just to make sure they're the same.
So the last thing I'm going to change
is the height or the space between these
lines. To do that, we're
going to use line height.
Let's scroll down and then add another
property called line dash height.
And let's set this to 20 pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
Save and refresh,
and let's set it to maybe 22 pixels,
save and refresh. Okay, so
I'm pretty happy with this.
And lastly, we're going to modify the
space between these two paragraphs. First,
we're going to reset the default margin.
Let's get rid of the margin bottom on
the first one here and the margin top
on the second one. So margin dash top,
I'm going to get rid of it and
set it to zero, save and refresh.
And then we're going to set a margin
bottom, maybe the same thing as up here,
20 pixels, save and refresh.
All right, so that
looks really good to me.
We just recreated a really nice looking
style that you can find on youtube.com.
And the general process that we use is
first we created the elements with html,
and then we style them
with CSS one by one.
So before we move on to the next exercise,
I'm going to show you a
way to clean up our code.
So if you notice all of our styles
right now have a line called font,
family Aerial.
Now we can actually clean this up and
remove the duplication by creating a new
style.
This time we're going to target all
paragraphs on the page and we're going
to give all paragraphs,
font, dash, family colon,
ariel, save.
So this style is going to apply to all
paragraphs, which means all of these.
That means that we actually don't
need this line in any of these
class styles anymore, so we can
actually remove all of these.
Now if I save it and I refresh,
you can see that nothing changes because
this is doing the same thing as the
code that we had before.
So you can also see from this example
that an element can be targeted by two
sets of styles.
For example, for this code here,
we're targeting all P elements on the
page and all elements with a class of
video dash title. If we scroll down here,
here we have AP element that
has a class of video dash title,
which means it's going to be targeted by
both this set of styles and this set of
styles. So it's being targeted
by multiple sets of styles.
Now another thing that we can clean up
is remember how we reset the margins
for all of our paragraphs. Instead of
doing it for each one individually,
we can actually put it all
up here. So for example,
we can set the margin dash top to zero
and the margin dash bottom to zero zero,
we save it and we refresh.
It looks pretty much the same except
we're now cleaning up all of the default
styles up here so that we don't have to
do it in our code at the bottom. So we
don't need this anymore or this
or this. If we save that and refresh,
we still get the same thing because we've
reset all of our styles in this set of
styles.
Now the last concept I want to show you
before we move on to the next exercise
is the fact that in this set of styles,
we're setting the margin bottom to zero,
but here we're also setting the margin
bottom to five pixels and the margin
bottom to 20 pixels.
So how does that work?
We're setting it to zero
here and to five and 20 here.
Which style does the element actually get?
And the answer is we're getting these
style down here. So if we refresh,
you'll notice that there's still 20
pixels of space between these two
paragraphs.
Now you might think that it's
because this line is at the top,
and then once we get to this line,
it overrides anything that comes
before it. But if we actually move
this to the top
and we save and reload,
you'll see that we still have
20 pixels of margin bottom.
So why is this happening? This is
something called CSS specificity.
If we have multiple lines
setting the same property,
there's actually a priority that the
browser follows. So in this situation,
this style has more
priority than this style,
and to determine which
one has more priority,
we have to look at this
word before the brackets.
So this word tells us what
these styles are targeting.
This is known as a selector.
This is another selector that
targets a particular class.
Now the selector that is the most
specific is going to have higher priority.
So this selector is actually
more specific than paragraphs.
So what I mean by specific is that this
targets all paragraphs on the page,
and this targets a specific class.
So not all paragraphs are going
to have this class of video dash stats.
So that's why this is more specific.
It targets a smaller group
of elements than this.
That's why this line has
priority over this line.
So that's just an introduction
to CSS specificity. For now,
just know that a class name
like this has more priority
than an element name like this.
So I'm going to move this code back
and we'll continue with the rest
of this exercise. Next,
we're going to copy this text from Apple.
So you can see that there is a background
color and the text is centered.
And also if I hover over
this part of the text,
we get a pointer on our mouse
and we have an underlying
text. So let's see how we can do this.
First we'll create the element and then
we'll style it one by one. So we'll go
down here and we're going
to create a new paragraph
and let's copy this text
into that paragraph.
Let's copy and paste. Whoops. Okay,
save it and refresh.
Okay, so that looks good.
So usually if you have a greater
then or less than symbol,
you want to create it with an HTML
entity because the browser could confuse
these symbols with an HTML tag.
So I'm going to search
for the HTML entity for
greater than. So this is
the symbol that we want,
and I'm just going to copy
and paste this into our code,
save it, and refresh. Next,
let's actually add some
space at the bottom of this
paragraph so that we can see
our new paragraph clearly.
So we're going to here and just add some
margin to the bottom because it's a
little bit too cluttered right now.
All right, so that looks pretty good.
We're going to start by adding
a class to our paragraph,
so we can target it in
our CSS class equals maybe
apple dash text,
save it and refresh and
apple text. Okay,
and first I'm actually also going
to give some spacing at the bottom
so it's easier for us
to see our actual code.
So 50 pixels at the
bottom, save and refresh,
and now it's a little easier
to see what we're working with.
So next I'm going to change the font size.
One thing you'll notice is that
the font family is already aerial.
If we scroll back up,
we have this set of styles that
target all paragraph elements.
So it's already set our
font family two aerial.
Let's scroll back down and
let's adjust the font size.
So this one looks a little bit smaller,
so let's set it to maybe 14
pixels. Let's see how that looks.
Save it and refresh. Okay,
so I think that looks pretty
similar to the design.
And now the next step is let's
set a background color of red.
Now,
a trick for getting the background color
is we're going to right click in an
empty area, inspect,
click this icon and click the
element we want to copy styles for,
and then go to the computer
tab and scroll down.
Now we have the background color.
I'm just going to copy
this and paste it in here.
So background dash color,
we're going to paste
that save and we refresh.
Okay, we next we're going
to do the text color.
So let's set the text color
to white color dash white
save and refresh. And now
if we look at our design,
this text is actually centered
on the page. So remember,
the property for centering
text is text dash,
align center,
save and refresh. Okay,
and the last thing is there's some
spacing at the top and the bottom here.
So here we actually want to add spacing
inside our paragraph. And remember from
the previous lesson, spacing on the
inside of an element is called padding.
We're going to add some
padding to the top,
maybe 10 pixels and then
padding to the bottom
and 10 pixels. Let's see how
that looks. Save and refresh.
Okay, so I think we could add
a little bit more padding,
so let's change it to maybe 18 pixels,
save and refresh. All right, so
I think this looks close enough.
Now the last thing we're going to
work on is this text here that becomes
underlined when we hover over it. First,
let's learn how to create underlying text.
We're going to practice our Googling
skills and we're just going to search for
CSS text underlying. So keep it simple.
And then in the first link we
have the text decoration property.
We scroll down, we have an overline
line through and underline.
So let's grab this piece of code.
I'm going to just copy it in here,
save and refresh. Now unfortunately,
this property actually
affects the entire paragraph,
but we want it to only affect this
part of the text. So how do we do that?
We're going to need to learn
something called a text element.
So a text element is an element
that is inside a line of text.
So let's do an example
just to see how it works.
We're going to go to the bottom and
we're going to create a new paragraph to
practice with. And let's actually just
copy this text and put it in there,
save and refresh.
And now we're going to create some
text elements on this paragraph.
So the first text element I'm going
to show you is called the strong
element.
So now let's copy maybe this
text and then put it in there
and save and refresh.
So the strong element here creates this
bolded text that you see on the webpage.
So the thing to know about text elements
is that they essentially exist inside a
line of text and then they modify
that part of the text so they're not
modifying the whole thing.
Another text element we can
create is the you element.
So this one creates some
text that is underlined.
So if we move this text into here,
save it and refresh,
we now get an underlying text element.
So that is how we style specific
parts of a line of text.
The final text element I want
to show you is called the span.
So let's create a span element
and we're going to put this
text inside. So cut and paste,
save it, and refresh. Okay,
so the span element is here, but
you'll notice that nothing changed.
And that's because the span element is
the most generic text element. It has
no styles.
So the span is really useful because
we can actually give it a class
and we can style it ourselves
and give it any style we want.
Now we could add the class attribute
to these other text elements like the
strong and the U element,
but notice that these text
elements come with a default style,
and that may not be what we want,
especially in this situation where we
don't actually want a style until we hover
over it. So that's why we
use the span text element.
It lets us modify a specific part of the
text without affecting the whole thing,
and it's the most flexible and
we can style it however we want.
So if we give it a class of span example
and then go to our css,
and then we target span example,
we can give it any styles
that we want. For example,
we can set a color of red.
Now if we save this and refresh the span,
now turns this part of the text red.
The other cool thing is that everything
we know about CSS still applies.
So we can target span example colon hover,
and these styles will only apply
when we hover over the span.
So in this case, let's underline
it because that's what we want.
So if we do text dash
decoration and underline
just like up here, save it and refresh.
Now this span has a color of red here,
and when we hover over it, these style
apply and it's going to get underlined.
Let's use what we learned
here. To finish up our example,
we're going to first remove this line
because we don't want to underline the
whole thing.
Let's refresh and we want to create a
span so that we only target this part of
the text. Let's go back down.
I'm going to resize it a little
bit just so that we can see.
Okay, so we're going
to scroll down to here.
I'm going to wrap this in a span.
So just going to move this into here,
save refresh.
And now we're going to style this span.
So remember we're going to give it a
class so that we can target it in our css.
Let's call this the shop link, save it,
and let's go here and we're
going to style it now.
So shop dash link.
So remember the style for this is that
the mouse turns into this pointer.
So to do that, we're going to use
a property cursor, dash pointer,
save and refresh. So now when we
hover over it, our mouse is a pointer.
And the last thing is that we want it
to be underlined when we hover over it.
So let's create a hover
style shop dash link,
and we're going to give this
pseudo class colon hover,
and we're going to underline
it with text decoration,
underline,
save it and refresh. And
now when we hover over this,
it's going to turn our mouse into a
pointer and it's going to underline it.
So we've achieved the exact
same styles as art design.
So there's one last thing I'm
going to show you in this lesson.
Let's go back into our code.
We're going to scroll all the way to
the bottom and recall that in H T M L,
if we have multiple spaces like this,
it will combine them all into one space.
So if I save this and refresh,
you'll see that only
one space shows up here.
So I'm going to show you how to
get over this problem. Basically,
instead of typing out
multiple spaces in our html,
all we have to do is set a
margin left on this text element.
So we're going to set a margin left on
this element and it's going to add spaces
on the left. So as an
example, let's scroll up
and we're going to add margin left
to our span element here, and
let's do something like 12 pixels,
save it and refresh. And now we
have spacing between our words.
So this is how we achieve
multiple spaces between our words,
even though H T M L combines them.
So that is how we create really
professional looking text like this and
like this, we first create
the element with H T M L,
and then we style it one by one with css.
And if we want to style only
just a part of the text,
we have to use a text element like a span.
In this lesson,
we're going to learn the proper structure
of html and that's going to give us
access to all the features of
html. So up until this point,
we've actually haven't been following
that structure. For example,
if we look at our code, if we scroll down,
we can see that we're creating
elements directly like this.
If we go to our website
however, and we write click and
we look at our html,
we can see that we have some elements
here called the HTML element,
the head element and the body element.
So this is a structure that we're actually
supposed to have in our HTML file,
and because we don't have it, the browsers
automatically creating this for us.
So this was fine in the previous
lessons because we're just learning,
but it's actually best to
have this structure in our
code because we're actually
missing some useful features. So let's
go ahead and learn what this structure
is and add it to our code.
So we're going to go back to all of
our code and add in this structure.
Let's go back to our very first HTML file,
and at the top I'm going to add some
spaces and we're going to learn what the
proper structure is.
Every HTML file is going to
start with less than exclamation
doc type space, H T M L, greater that.
So you just have to type this line
out exactly as I have it here.
This is not really an element,
it's just a special line that
has a meaning to the browser.
This tells a browser to use a modern
version of html. If we don't have this,
it sort of falls back to an older
version that has less features.
The next part of these structure
is to create an H T M L element.
So this says there's a
webpage inside this element.
There's not much meaning to it,
we just have to have this at the top and
the closing tag at the bottom of every
H T M L file. Next we're going
to create this head element,
so head and closing tag,
and we're going to create
the body element. So body
and closing tag.
So this is the proper structure of all
of our HTML files and this is how we're
supposed to start and end our files.
So here you can see that we have
an element inside. Another element,
this is called nesting. So not only
can we have text inside an element,
we can have other
elements inside elements.
We've actually already seen an example
of this in the previous lesson.
We put a text element, like
a span inside a paragraph,
and that allows us to have some text
in the paragraph that was styled
differently. Here we have our
second example of nesting.
We have a head and a body
element inside an HTML element.
So this doesn't actually do anything
visually unlike our previous example,
but it's part of the HTML syntax
rules that we have to follow.
Every file has one and
only one HTML element,
and this element represents
the entire webpage.
And the HTML element is
designed for nesting.
It's designed to contain one head
element and one body element,
and then everything on our webpage is
supposed to go either inside the head or
inside the body.
So both of these elements are also
designed for nesting or to have elements
inside.
The body element here is supposed to
contain all the elements that are visible
on the page. So let's
actually open this website.
We're going to go into our folder that
contains our code and we're going to
right click open with Chrome.
So on this website you can see
that the paragraph is visible,
the button and the link is visible. So
all of this is visible on the website,
so it should go into this body section.
Inside the head element are all the
elements that are not visible on the page.
So here's an example of such an element.
We're going to create
an element called title.
So the text inside the title here is
going to change the text in the tab
here. So for example,
if I use the text first website,
that's going to show up in the
tab. So if I save and refresh,
that's where the title element shows up.
But notice that this title element
doesn't actually show up on the page and
that's why it belongs in the head section.
So the title is the first feature that
we get from following this structure.
The second feature that we get that's
really useful is the ability to
automatically reload our webpage
whenever we change our code.
So you may have noticed that
every time we change our code,
we have to go to our website and then
refresh the page to see our new code.
Now we can actually avoid
this by following this
structure and then installing a
VS code extension.
So let's go to this extension area here
and we're going to install the extension
live server. I'm going to install this,
and now we can use the live server
to reload our page automatically.
Whenever our code changes to open
this website in a live server,
we're going to right click and
we're going to click open with
live server.
And now we've opened this website and it
will automatically refresh whenever we
change our code. So if I change
the code like this and I save now,
it automatically refreshes without
having us to go back and forth.
So that's a really useful feature
to speed up our development.
Now let's get some more practice and
we're going to convert both of these HTML
files to use the proper structure First.
I'm going to actually just
delete all the extra tabs here.
And now let's work on the buttons file.
Now the live server doesn't really work
if we don't have that HTML structure in
our code. So let's add
that structure first.
I'm going to go up here and we're
going to create the structure.
So remember we start with a doc type
space, H T M L, and then we're
going to create an H T M L element.
And then inside we're
going to create a head
and we're going to create a body element.
And remember, the body contains
everything that is visible on the page.
So if we scroll down,
these three buttons are
visible on the page.
So we're going to you move
these into the body element
And now they're in the right
place. Now for this style element,
remember that we said the style element
doesn't actually create anything visible
on the page, but it could change
the style of other elements.
So this is a good example of something
that should go in the head element
because it doesn't show
up visibly on the page.
So we're going to copy all of this
and put it into the head element.
We're going to go up and we're
going to save this in here.
So now all of our CSS code
is in the right place,
and now that we have the proper structure,
we can open this with our live server
just to make sure everything looks good,
let's go here and add a
title like we learned.
And this is going to change
the text at the top of the tab.
So let's call this
buttons practice, save it,
and you'll notice that it automatically
reloads. Now we're going to learn
another feature that we get
from following this structure.
If we look at our code,
we have all of our CSS code together
along with our HTML code. Now,
this gets confusing because we have a
lot of lines of code and we're mixing two
different languages.
To solve this problem,
we can move all of our
CSS into a different file.
So let's copy all of this and we're
going to create a new file to just
contain our css.
We're going to go here and create
a new file and let's call it
buttons dot css.
Make sure your file ends in dot CSS to
tell the computer that this file contains
CSS code.
And now we're going to move
our code into that file
and save and save here.
Now you'll notice that we
lost all of our styles,
and that's because we now need to
load this new CSS file into our
html. To do that,
we're going to learn a new
element called the link element.
So the link is sort of a special element
because it doesn't require a closing
tag like we've seen so far.
Elements like these are
called void elements.
So if we search for
Google and we search Void
elements html,
this will give us a list of elements
that don't need a closing tag.
So these are the exceptions to the rule
that everything has to have a closing
tag. So don't worry too much
about memorizing all of these.
You'll get more used to it the
more that you write H T M L.
And I'll introduce Void
elements to you one by one.
So here we're going to learn
our first void element,
which doesn't need a closing tag, but
this element takes two attributes.
The first one is called r e
L, which stands for relation.
So what kind of thing are
we linking? In this case,
we're going to link in a style sheet,
and then we have to tell
it another attribute,
which is H Ref.
So this tells a link,
we what file we're going
to link into this file.
So here we're going to link
our CSS file into our html.
So we're going to link buttons css. Okay,
now let's go back to our page. You
notice we don't have our styles,
and now when I save this, we
get all of our styles back,
and that's because we're loading all
the CSS code found in Buttons css,
which is all the code we
had before into our html.
So this is another way to load CSS
without having to write it all in our
HTML file. Now,
the big benefit of this is that each
file contains less code and each file
contains one type of code. So in
this file we only have H T M L code,
and in this file we only have c s s code.
So it makes the files
smaller and more focused,
and that's going to help us develop
easier. Now, before we move on,
I do want to talk about the HF attribute.
So the way that the computer finds
this file is that it's going to search
right beside our HTML file.
So it's going to search right beside
the file that this code is in.
So it's going to look for a
file called Buttons Dos css,
it finds it and it loads it into our html.
But if this file was in a folder,
let's create a new folder.
Let's call this styles.
Let's put the CSS file in our new folder.
And now you notice that
these styles are gone,
and that's because this link can't
find Buttons dot CSS anymore.
What it's trying to do is it's trying to
look for a file called Buttons dot css
beside our html, and
there's nothing there.
So to link a file that's inside a folder,
you first have to give the name of the
folder that's beside the HTML file. In
this case it's Styles. Next,
we have to type a slash.
So this slash means we're
going into the Styles folder,
and then inside we're going
to find the buttons dot css.
So this is something called File Paths,
and this is basically how we locate
different files within our HTML code.
So let's save this, and now we're able
to successfully link our CSS file.
So that's a little bit
about how file paths work.
We're going to need to use this later
on in this course when we recreate
youtube.com. Now let's
get some more practice,
and we're going to convert our final
file into the proper HTML structure.
So let's create the structure first
because we can't use Live Server just
yet. We're going to
write a doc type space,
HTML at the top, and then we're
going to have an HTML element.
And then inside we're going
to have a head element,
and then we're going
to have a body element.
Now everything that is visible
is going to go inside the body.
So if we scroll down, all
of our paragraphs are going
to go inside the body,
cut and paste, save it,
and now anything that's not visible is
going to go inside the head. So if we
scroll down, the style element
is not visible on the page,
so it's going to go inside
the head element, cut
and paste. All right,
so now we have a proper HTML structure.
We're going to open this with live
server, move it to the left here,
everything looks good, and we're
going to do some more practice.
We're going to set the title
again just to get more repetition.
It's called this text Practice, save It.
And you'll notice that
the title is set up here.
And we're going to move all
of this into a CSS file.
So let's create a new file called text dot
css,
and we're going to move all
of the CSS code into there.
So let's cut and paste it into here.
Next we're going to link the
CSS file in this HTML file.
So let's create a link element.
It needs two attributes,
R, e, L, and H ref.
So we're going to link a style sheet,
and the file is located
right beside the HTML file.
So all we need to do is link text, css,
save it, and refresh.
And it's back to where we were again.
Let's practice moving this into a folder.
Now we're unable to find text
CSS beside our HTML file,
but there is a Styles folder.
So we're going to look
inside the Styles folder.
Going to use a slash to go inside,
and we're going to link
this text CSS file.
And that is how we use file
paths to link CSS files.
The last feature we're going to look at
that we get from this structure is the
ability to add a new
fonts onto our website.
So websites have a set of fonts by
default that we can use. For example,
one of them is called Aerial.
Another one that we've seen
is called Times New Roman.
That's basically the font that
we get on a fresh website. Now,
in addition to these default fonts,
we can actually load new
fonts from the internet,
and we're going to learn how to
do that within this structure.
So let's go to our webpage.
And Google actually provides a lot of
really great free fonts that we can use.
So we're going to open a new tab,
and we're going to
search for Google Fonts,
and we're going to go
into this first link. Now,
this website might look a
little different for you,
but the general process
is the same. First,
we're going to search
for a font that we like.
So a good font to use here is Robo,
and this is the font that we're going to
use for our final project. We're going
to pick this font,
and then inside here we're going
to pick the styles that we want.
So for example, I'm going
to pick the regular style.
And I'm also going to
pick the bold style here.
So I'm going to pick the bold
style and then I'm going to go
to the basket of fonts that I selected,
and then Google is going to give me the
code that I need to load these fonts.
All we need to do is copy
this code exactly and then
put it in our head section of our html.
So we're going to put it in our
structure in this head section.
And now we've loaded a new font
that we can use on our website.
So now let's go back to our website
and we're going to use this new font.
So remember that currently
we set our fonts to aerial.
This time we loaded the font called
reto, and that's what we're going to use.
So let's change aero here to Reto.
Now when I save the
font is going to change.
And there you go.
It might not look that much different
because Reto is very similar to aerial.
But if we inspect and we
click on this element and
go to the computer tab,
we'll see that the font
family has now been to Reto.
So this is how we can load a huge
selection of fonts from Google onto
our webpage and use them on our website.
So those are the features that we get
from following this HTML structure.
Every website that we create from
now on will always have an HTML tag,
a head and a body and
a doc type at the top.
Now we're ready to work on the
final project of this course,
recreating youtube.com. Just like before,
I've created a page on my website that'll
show us what the final project looks
like.
So first we're to close all of our
browser tabs because we're going to start
over again,
and then we're going to open a
new page and we're going to go to
super
simple.dev/exercises/youtube.
So on this page you can see what
our final project will look like.
So we're going to learn how to
recreate youtube.com that you see here.
So first, let's set up our
project in our code editor.
So let's go into here and
let's actually create a
folder that's going to contain
all of our previous code.
So the final project is going
to contain a lot of code,
so we don't want to get it
confused with the previous lessons.
So let's call this
intro dash two dash html
and we're going to put
everything inside this folder.
We're going to put this
in here and these HTML
files in here as well.
Next we're going to create a new
HTML file for our final project.
So let's create a file
called YouTube dot html,
and I actually put it inside this folder.
I'm going to take it out
by dragging it down here.
So now we have an intro to html
folder and our YouTube dot html
and we're ready to get started. First,
we're going to set up the proper
structure of HTML that we learned in the
previous lesson.
So we're going to start off with
a lesson exclamation doc type
and html,
and then we're going to create an HTML
element that's going to contain our
entire webpage. And inside here
we're going to have a head element
And we're also going
to have a body element.
Now that we have the structure,
we can open it with live server.
And now we have our blank page.
So this page is going to automatically
reload when we change our code.
Now before we can work
on the final project,
we need to learn two more HTML elements,
how to load images onto our website
and how to create a search box.
So let's start with loading images first.
So I'm going to show you how you can
download these thumbnails from my website.
We're going to right click
in a blank area and inspect.
Now if we click this icon in
the top left and hover over an
image and click it,
and you might need to drag
this down to see the html,
we can find the image in the html,
and here is the URL for the image.
So we can actually click this and
it will open the image in a new tab
and we can control S to save it.
So make sure we save this image
in the folder that contains all of our
code. So that's this folder for me.
I'm going to save it. And now in
my code editor I can see the image.
Next we're going to create an HTML
element to load this onto our page.
So I'm going to go back to my page here,
and then we're going to go into the
body and create the image element which
is less than img, greater than.
Now the image element is unique
because it's another void element.
So we mentioned void elements
briefly in the previous lesson.
It's an element that doesn't
require a closing tag.
So this is one of those
exceptions to the rule.
So the image element takes
one attribute called src.
Now this attribute tells a computer
which image to display on the website.
So for us,
that image is the one we downloaded
called thumbnail one WebP.
So we're going to display
thumbnail dash one dot WebP,
and when I save it, the image
is now loaded onto our website.
So this source attribute
works the same way as the
link attribute that we saw earlier.
It follows the rules of file
paths to locate our file.
So just as a reminder, if we
type thumbnail one dot WebP here,
it's going to look for a
file named thumbnail one dot
WebP right beside our HTML
file. It's going to find it and
then load it onto our website.
But now we're actually going to create
a folder because we have multiple
thumbnails and we want to organize them,
we're going to create a folder called
thumbnails and we're going to drag this
into that folder. So now
for this source attribute,
we don't have a file beside our
HTML called thumbnail one WebP,
and then you see this error here.
So this means that there is
an error loading an image.
Now to find it in the thumbnails file,
we're going to type
thumbnails slash thumbnail one
WebP. So first it's going to look for
a file or folder called thumbnails.
Beside the HTML file, it finds this one,
and then the slash here means to
go inside the folder and then find
this file inside that
folder, which is here.
So that's how we load
images onto our page.
Now we're going to learn how
to style our image elements.
So let's go into our head section
here and create a style element.
Now before we do that,
I forgot to do something which is
let's create a title for our page.
So we can call this youtube.com clone,
and if we save this, the title will
show up in the tabs. All right,
so let's learn how to style
our image. So as always,
we're going to give it a class attribute
and let's just call this thumbnail.
And now we can target
this class in our css.
So dot thumbnail.
Now all of the CSS properties that
we learned so far apply to the image.
Some of them make sense
and some of them don't.
So one property that obviously doesn't
make sense is something like font dash
size. So if I save it,
you'll see nothing changes because
there is no text inside this element.
It's an image. So even though this
works, it doesn't really change anything.
Now a property that does make
sense for an image is width.
So this was set the width of this image.
Let's make it smaller to
match what we have here.
So let's make the width
something like 300 pixels.
Now we save it and now the width
of this image is 300 pixels.
So one thing you might notice is that
when we set the width of an image,
the height also changes.
So before we had this
notice that the image was a lot taller,
but as soon as we set the width,
the height also adjusts. So that's one
behavior of images that we should know.
When we set the width,
the height will also adjust so that
the image has the same dimensions.
What I mean by same dimensions is that
it keeps the same shape. So for example,
if I set the height as well,
this is going to cause the image to
lose its shape or lose its dimensions.
Let's set the height to something
like 600 pixels, save it,
and now you'll see that the
image is 600 pixels tall,
but it's lost its shape and
now it's become stretched.
So that behavior of an
image sort of keeps us safe,
so it keeps the image looking nice. Now,
if we really wanted an image
that was exactly 300 pixels
by 300 pixels, what can we do?
So this image, as you can see,
is getting stretched out.
So in addition to all the CSS properties
that we've learned so far,
the image element has its own properties
that are specific to an image.
So one of these is called object fit.
So this determines what happens if
this size doesn't match the images
dimensions or the images
shape. So for example,
I can set a value of cover.
So this tells the image to
cover this 300 by 300 area,
but it's also going to keep its shape.
So this area might not be big
enough to show the whole image,
which may or may not be okay
depending on what we want to do.
Now we can adjust which part of the
image that we see using another property
called object dash position.
So currently we're looking
at the center of the image.
We can set the object position to left
to view the left side of the image,
or we can also set it to the right to
view the right side of the image in the
case that the image
doesn't fit in our area.
Another value we can give
to object fit is contain.
So if we save this,
the entire image is going to shrink
until it is contained in this 300 by
300 area. So I'm going to set a border
so that we can see what this is doing.
I'm going to set a border of two pixels,
Border width, two pixels
border style of solid order color of red.
So here the border shows
us our 300 by 300 area and
contain makes the image shrink
until it is contained in the area,
but that means that it might not be able
to cover the entire area if it's not
the right shape. So in this case,
the object position can
move the image to the top
or to the bottom.
So that's basically how
images work. As you can see,
a lot of the CSS properties that we
learned before like width and height and
border can be applied
to the image element.
And the image element also has some of
its own properties that determine how the
image is displayed. So for now,
let's create something that's
kind of like our final website.
So I'm going to set
the image with two 300,
and I'm not going to set a height so that
the image doesn't stretch and we don't
have to do all this stuff and I can
actually just remove all of this.
So the only thing I'm doing is telling
the image to shrink down to a width of
300 and to shrink the height as well
so that the image keeps its shape.
So we're going to stick with this for
now and this is going to correspond to
this part of our final project,
and we're going to start learning how
to build out the entire video preview.
The next element we're going to learn
in this lesson is how to create search
boxes like the one you see up here.
So let's go back into our website and
we'll learn the code for creating a search
box.
The HTML for creating
a text box is less than
input greater than.
So the input element is a void
element, just like the image element,
it doesn't require a closing tag.
So the input element has several
attributes that we can give it.
One of them is called the type.
So we set the type equals text,
it's going to give us a text box.
I'm going to save this,
and now in our HTML you
can see we have a text box.
Another type that we can give to
this input is called checkbox.
So if I save this, now we have a checkbox.
So for our purposes we're going to set
the type to a text box because we want to
create the YouTube search box up here.
So you also notice that this
text box has a word search in it,
and when I start typing,
that search word is gone.
So this is sort of like a label for the
user telling them what to put into this
text box. And this is
known as a placeholder.
So if we go back to our website,
we're going to add a placeholder
to our new text box. To do that,
we're just going to give
the attribute placeholder
and let's set the placeholder
as search. We save it.
Now we have a placeholder that
disappears when we start typing.
So that's how we create what we
see on YouTube. So for the text
box,
all of the CSS properties that we learned
so far can be used on the text box.
So let's look at some examples.
Let's add a class attribute first,
like always so that we can target
it. Let's call it search dash bar.
And then inside our css,
we're going to target
dot search bar class.
And then inside we can set our usual
CSS properties. So for example,
in this case,
we can set a font dash size
and let's add it to 20 pixels,
save it and reload. And now you can
see that the font size has changed.
Another thing we can change
is margin or the spacing.
So let's add some margin to the left
of 12 pixels, save it.
And now we have some spacing on the left.
So basically everything that we've
learned so far about CSS properties we can
use on the search box. For now,
let's remove these example styles and
we're going to style the search box to
look like our final project
later in the scores.
In this lesson,
we're going to learn one
of the most important CSS
properties called the display
property, and we're going to use this
to start building out our final project.
We're going to start off by taking a
look at our final project and we're going
to start building out the text here.
So we're going to create
paragraphs for these text.
So let's go into our code and we're
going to create three paragraphs.
So here's one of them,
and we can copy the text.
So copy and paste.
So here's another paragraph
and we're going to copy this
and paste it in our code.
And here's a final paragraph
and we'll save. So here,
I'm actually going to use the H T M L
entity again instead of this special
character. So to save us some time,
I'm just going to type it out here.
Now I'm going to save this
and go back to my webpage.
And now we have the text
that we're going to use,
but you might notice something weird.
How come this text box
is beside our image?
If we look at our paragraphs,
they are on top of each other,
so one after another on each line.
How come text boxes and images
appear on the same line?
So this is due to the display property
in C S s and we're going to learn what
that is right now. In H T M L,
there are three types of elements.
The first type of element
is called a block element.
A block element takes up the entire line.
So a paragraph by default
is a block element.
We can see that in our dev tools by
right clicking in the browser and then
clicking inspect, And then
clicking this icon in the top left
right here and then
hovering over our paragraph.
So you can see that even
though the text goes to here,
the paragraph extends to the end of the
line because the paragraph by default
is a block element. Block
elements take up the entire line.
So let's go into our code and I'm going
to demonstrate another property of block
elements.
If we set a class on the
paragraph and we style it,
so let's set a class of video dash title,
let's save it and we're
going to style it and let's
it a width of 300 pixels,
save and refresh.
And now this paragraph is only 300 pixels,
so it's not stretching to
the end of the line anymore.
Let's verify that using the dev tools
by clicking this top left and then
hovering over.
So you see that the paragraph itself
only takes a width of 300 like we set in
our css,
but it still takes up the entire
line denoted by the orange part
on the right here. If we click on
this paragraph and we go to the
computer tab, notice that there
is no margin on the right side,
but we still have a ton of
orange area on the right.
So this is how block elements work.
Regardless of how much
space they actually take up,
they take up the entire line,
so they're forced to be on their own
line like this paragraph and these two
paragraphs. So that's what
a block element means.
The second type of element
is an inline block element.
An inline block element only takes up
as much space as it needs to and doesn't
take up the entire line.
An example of an inline block element
is the image element and the input
element.
They only take up as much space as
they need to and they don't take up the
entire line.
So another element could appear beside
them like we see here. So that's the
inline block element.
The third type of basic HTML element
is called the inline element.
Inline elements are
basically just text elements.
They appear within a line
of text. So if you remember,
we briefly introduce the element strong.
So this element appears
within a line of text like
this.
So this element makes a part of the text
bold and it appears within a line of
text. So those are the three
basic types of HTML elements,
a block element, which takes up the
entire line and inline block element,
which only takes up as
much space as it needs to,
and an inline element which
appears within a line of text.
Now the most interesting of these three
are the block elements and the inline
block elements because they determine
how these elements are displayed on the
page, whether beside each other
or above and below. In addition,
we can use a CSS property called display
to easily switch between block and
inline block. So let's
see how that would work.
So first let's start by switching
from block to inline block.
We're going to switch both of these
paragraphs to inline block elements.
Let's go into our code and we're
going to give this a class.
Let's call this video dash
author and let's call this
video dash stats. And we're
going to style these classes.
So we're going to style the
video dash author as well as the
video stats,
and we're going to set both of
these to display inline dash block
and this one as well
display inline dash block.
I'm going to introduce a
little bit of CSS syntax here.
If we have two sets of CSS
styles that are the same,
we can actually use a different
syntax by adding a comma here.
So this comma means that we're going
to target both the video author class
and the video stats class
with this set of styles.
So this is how we target multiple
things in CSS with a comma.
So as you can see, these two elements
now appear beside each other.
They're both inline block elements and
only take up as much space as they need
to. If we click the top left in
the DEF tools and hover over this,
you'll notice that this paragraph is
now only taking up as much space as the
text and the same thing for this
paragraph. So as you can see,
even though paragraphs by
default are block elements,
we can change them very easily to inline
block with the display property so that
we can put them beside each other.
Next we're going to try
the opposite direction.
We're going to go from an inline
block element to a block element,
and we're going to put these two on
separate lines. So let's go into our code
and we're going to style
the thumbnail class.
So I'm going to scroll up here and
I'm going to convert this to display
block, and now it will turn
the image into a display block,
and this will cause the image to take
up the entire line pushing the text box
down to the next line. If I save it,
now you can see that this image
is taking up the entire line.
We're going to verify this by clicking
the top left and then hovering over this
image. So using this property,
we can control whether an element appears
on the same line or on a different
line, and that's what we're
going to do to copy this design.
The search bar is at the top.
We have an image and then three
paragraphs each on a different line.
So we're going to use a display
property to achieve this.
Let's go into our code.
And first let's put the
search box at the top,
Save it. And since our image
is already display block,
it's going to take up the entire line,
so it's forced to take up a
line below the search box.
So I think this is pretty good as
long as these search box is up there,
then we're good to go. Next,
we're going to turn these back into
display block because we want these on
separate lines like our
design here. So to do that,
we're going to go into our code and
we could change this to display block,
but remember that paragraphs
by default are display block,
so we can just get rid
of this code, save it,
and now our elements are appearing at
least in the same structure as the design
from top to bottom. And each
element is taking up its own line.
So that is the display property.
It allows us to control how
an element is displayed,
whether they're a block element and take
up the whole line or they're an inline
block element and only take up
as much space as they need to.
In this lesson,
we're going to learn about the most
important HTML element called the diviv
element.
For example, here's twitter.com.
If you look at the HTML that Twitter uses,
you can see that they're using lots and
lots of divs. Here's another example,
Instagram. If we look at Instagram's html,
we can also see that they're
using lots and lots of divs.
So what exactly is a diviv
and why is it used so much?
So the diviv element stands for division,
but an easy way to understand this
is that the diviv is just a box.
We're going to go into our
code and look at an example.
So below our paragraphs,
let's create a diviv element,
and inside we're going to have
some text. This is a diviv,
save it.
And now we have our first diviv element
on the page to show you that the diviv
is just a box. We're going
to right click and inspect,
And then we're going to click this top
left icon and hover over the diviv.
So as you can see, we created
a box around our text.
You'll notice that this box stretches to
the end, and that's because the diviv,
like the paragraph by
default is a block element,
so it takes up the entire line, but
like we learned in the previous lesson,
we can easily change this to an inline
block using the display property.
So let's go ahead and do that and it'll
be more clear that this is really a box.
So we're going to set a class here.
We're going to call
this diviv dash example,
and now we're going to style it
and change the display to inline block
So that it doesn't take up the
entire line anymore, save it.
And now if we go to our webpage,
click this icon and hover over.
You can clearly see that the diviv
just creates a box around our content.
In this case, our content is some text.
So that's basically what a diiv is.
Now the second question is
why is a diiv so useful?
The key feature of a diiv is that
it can contain any other inside.
So right now we only have
some text inside the diviv,
but we can actually put
paragraphs, we can put images,
we can put any elements inside
divs as well as other divs.
Divs are meant to be containers.
And if we look at the YouTube
design that we have in our project,
we use containers everywhere.
So here's a container,
here's another container,
and here's another container.
These containers allow us to group all
of these elements together so that we can
create a layout that looks like this.
Here's another example from Twitter.
Here's a container, here's another
container, and here's another container.
In order to build complex
real world website,
we need containers to group our elements
together and lay them out on the page.
And the diviv is the perfect
solution for this container problem,
and that's why it's used so much.
Let's go back to our website and we're
going to practice using our diviv as a
container.
So we're going to create a container just
like our final project for this entire
video preview here. So that means we're
going to put all of these elements,
this image, and all three
paragraphs inside our diviv.
Let's see how that works.
So I'm going to get rid of this text first
and then I'm going to change this div
to a class of video dash preview
because this is going to contain all
these elements that are part of a video
preview.
And then I'm going to move the
image and the three paragraphs
into the diviv.
Now save,
and you might not notice any difference
because the diviv is simply just drawing
a box around the content inside,
but we can right click and
inspect and we can see the
diviv in our H T M L here.
And inside the diviv we have
our image and our paragraphs.
The diviv is just creating a
box around all this content.
So now I'll show you why
containers are so useful.
We're going to go into our code and we're
going to change the width of our diviv
element here. So we're going to
go up here and we can remove this.
Let's style the video preview class,
and we're going to set
a width of 300 pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
So the page doesn't look any different,
but if we click the icon in the top
left and then hover over our paragraphs,
we'll notice something interesting.
This paragraph is a block element,
so it's supposed to take up the
entire line, but in this case,
because this paragraph is inside a diviv,
it takes up the entire line in diviv.
So the way that block elements actually
work is that they take up the entire
line in their container
rather than on the page.
So that's really useful because
if we look at our final project,
so for these paragraphs, we want them
to appear on separate lines like this.
So we do want them to
take up their own line,
but we don't necessarily want them to
take up the line on the entire page
because we have some stuff on the right
side here. So to solve this problem,
we put the paragraphs inside a container
so that they take up their own line
in the container and not in the page.
And that's how we can create a layout like
this. Let's go back to our website.
If we hover over our diviv now,
so this blue box on the
left is our container.
It groups all the elements together and
keeps it within that blue area that you
see. Now,
a really cool thing about this is that
notice that the blue box doesn't actually
take up the entire page.
So we can actually have a second
box beside it on the right.
So we can add another blue box on the
right containing another video preview.
So now we're going to do
that, but first of all,
a diviv by default is a block element.
So notice on the right
side it's all orange.
That's because this diviv is taking
up the entire line. In this case,
we don't want it to take
up the entire line anymore.
That's why we're going to convert
it into an inline block element.
So let's go into our code.
We're going to go into the video
preview and we're going to type display
inline block. Let's save it.
And now we can see that our diviv is a
display inline block and it's actually
appearing beside our search bar
because this is also an inline block.
So they're both only taking up
as much space as they need to,
and now they can appear
beside each other. However,
we do want the search box to
be at the top in its own line.
So we're going to practice using
the display property. Again,
we're going to set the
search bar to display block
so that it takes up the entire line
and everything else is forced below it,
save it and refresh. And now if
we hover over this input element,
we can see that we forced it to
take up the entire line. Next,
we're going to create another video
preview beside this one because this is
inline block.
Now we can put another diviv here.
So I'm just going to simplify this
by making a copy of our current code.
So I'm just going to copy and paste,
and now we have two
video previews, save it.
And there we go. We now have two
video previews beside each other.
So they are two containers
right beside each other.
And remember in our css,
we set the width of these
containers to 300 pixels.
So that's the amount of
space that they take.
And we set their display to inline block
so they don't take up the entire line
and they can appear beside each other.
And now we're on our way to creating a
layout that looks like this. In fact,
let's actually replace the second
video preview here with this
content. So to do that,
we're going to download the
thumbnail and then change the text.
So let's right click and inspect.
I'm going to click this top
left and then click this image.
And now I can download the
thumbnail by going to this url.
And then clicking down here,
I'm going to control S
to save the thumbnail.
So I'm going to save it in the
folder that contains my code in the
thumbnails folder along with our
previous thumbnail. So save it here,
and I should see it in my
code editor right there.
Next, we're going to swap out the
thumbnails. So instead of thumbnail one,
we're going to set thumbnail two
and we're going to change the text.
So I'm going to change this
text here to be my title.
And I noticed we're still
using the strong element,
which we can now delete because
it was just for an example.
And I'm also going to
change the channel name here
and the video stats,
which is 19,000,004 years
and for years ago.
So now if I say
this, we have two different video
previews, but now we have a problem,
you'll notice that these two
aren't aligned with each other,
and that's because this
container is actually a little
bit taller than this one.
This piece of text here wraps
around to a second line.
While this one does not,
however, to make it look better,
we want to align these at the top.
So we learned this way back
in one of the earlier lessons,
and we're going to review how to do
that. We're going to go into our code
And we just have to set this
property vertical align,
and we're going to set it to top so
that these elements align at the top.
I'm going to save it. And
now that looks pretty good.
We now have two different video previews
and they are aligned with each other.
The last thing we'll do is to add
some space between them. So remember,
the space outside of an
element is called margin,
and we're going to add margin to
this entire container right now.
So we'll go into our code. And
in the video preview styles,
we're going to add margin dash, right?
And let's set it to something
like 15 pixels, save it.
And now we add in margin on the right.
And now the interesting thing about
this is if we right click and inspect,
and then in our HTML we find
our diviv, which is here,
you'll see that the margin is
applied on the entire diviv.
So that's how the div element works.
It's a container that groups other
elements together so that we can create
complex layouts like this and
eventually our YouTube project.
All right, so this is probably the
most important lesson of this course.
We're going to learn a technique
called the nested layouts technique,
and this is going to get us to a
professional level with HTML and css.
So what is the nested layouts technique?
The basic idea is that there
are two types of layouts.
The first one is a vertical
layout, which looks like this,
where items are on top of each other.
And then the second one is a horizontal
layout, which looks like this
where items are beside each other.
And by using a combination of
vertical and horizontal layouts,
we can create almost anything that
we see on a website. So for example,
let's take the YouTube video
preview that we've been working on.
We can break this down by
using a vertical layout.
And then inside this vertical layout,
we're going to have a horizontal layout.
And then inside this horizontal layout,
we're going to have a vertical layout.
So as you can see, we have layouts
inside layouts, inside layouts,
and that's why it's called the nested
layouts technique. And using this,
we can pretty much break down almost
everything that we see on a professional
website into a series of layouts and
then recreate them using our code.
So now we're going to go through together
a way that we can practice using the
nested layouts technique to break down
a design. We're going to go to our final
project. If you close it,
you can go to super
simple.dev/exercises/youtube.
And what we're going to do is we're going
to take a screenshot of one of these
designs,
and then we're going to use an image
editing software to draw out the layout.
So first, let's create
a screenshot on Windows.
You can use an app called SNP on Mac.
We're going to type command shift
n four to create a screenshot.
So let's take a screenshot of this
and then we're going to upload this
into an image editing software. Now,
feel free to use anything
that you're comfortable with,
but if you don't know what to
use, we can go to a new tab.
And we're going to search
for Google drawings,
And we're going to use this to
practice the nested layouts technique.
So once we have this open,
we're going to upload our image.
I'm going to go to my computer
and upload the screenshot.
And now we're just going to draw some
rectangles to represent our layout.
So we're going to go up here to shapes
and we're going to create a rectangle.
And first we're going to create
a vertical layout one and two.
So I'm just going to
draw a rectangle here.
Let's change the background to transparent
so we can see what's underneath.
And I'll make the border a little
more thick and change it to red
so it's easier to see.
And now I'm going to copy
this and paste it to create a
duplicate. And I'm just
going to move it down here
and resize the rectangle
like this. All right,
so just like that we created
a vertical layout for now.
Don't worry about the video time here.
We're going to recreate this later in
the course using another feature of css.
And now looking at our design, we
have a horizontal layout one and two.
So to create a horizontal layout,
we're going to draw it out
again using rectangles.
So let's go in here and we're
going to create another rectangle,
and we're going to draw out the
horizontal layout like this.
So here's one,
change the background to your
transparent and make it bold.
And I'm going to use the blue color
to represent a horizontal layout.
Now I'm going to copy
this and paste it here
and resize it a little bit
like that. And now we have
our horizontal layout.
And finally inside here we're going
to have a vertical layout like this.
So again, we're just going
to keep drawing rectangles.
I'm going to copy this
and paste it and move it
down here and resize it a little
bit so that we can see it.
So right here, and then copy this
and then paste it again.
We're going to create the second
part of our vertical layout
like that, and then copy
and paste it one last time
Down here.
So that's how we use the nested layouts
technique to visualize and break down a
design into a combination of
vertical layouts and horizontal
layouts. Now let's do some more practice.
We're going to take another design and
break that down using this technique.
So we're going to open a new
tab and we're going to go to
twitter.com/super
simple dev,
and we're going to take,
just take one of my tweets here
and take a screenshot of this.
And we're going to break down this
design using the same technique.
So let's go back to Google drawings,
and we're going to create a
new drawing to practice with.
And let's upload that
screenshot that we just took
onto this new drawing right here.
So now we're going to do the same thing.
We're going to draw rectangles
to represent the nested layouts.
So let's take a look at this to see
how we can break this down immediately.
I see that we have a
horizontal layout one and
two, so we can break it
down into that. First,
let's draw a rectangle to represent that.
So here's the first one,
and I'm just going to make it blue
to represent a horizontal layout And
copy and paste it like this.
Okay, so that's our horizontal layout.
And now looking at the design inside here,
I can see that we can break it down
further into a vertical layout.
So I'm going to draw some more rectangles,
and I'm just going to draw right here
and style it a little bit and make it
red to represent the vertical layout.
So copy and paste,
and I'm just going to move it down here.
Okay. Okay,
so that's two copy and paste
to get three.
So it doesn't have to be perfect.
It's just here to help us
visualize the design. All right,
so we have a horizontal layout, and
then inside we have a vertical layout.
And now looking at this, we can also
break this down into a horizontal layout.
Let's draw some more rectangles. Actually,
I'm going to just copy
this one and paste it and
resize it here. So I'm going
to break this down further
into a horizontal inside here.
And finally, we can break this part
down further into a horizontal layout.
So let's copy this
again and paste it here.
And I'm just going to
create a few of them
Like this.
So just like that,
we broke down this design into a
combination of vertical and horizontal
layouts using the nested
layouts technique.
So now that we have a good
understanding of how this works,
we're going to learn how to
recreate this using code.
So let's go back into our project.
I'm going to delete all
these extra tabs here.
So we're going to go from something that
looks like this to something that looks
like our final design
here. Now, before we start,
we actually need to download
this channel profile picture.
So remember to do that, we
can right click and inspect,
click the top left icon here,
and then click this picture.
And we have the URL to download it
here. So I'm going to hover over it,
scroll down and click this
link. Now, control S to save.
And I'm going to save it in the
folder that contains our code,
which is right here.
And now this should show
up in our code editor.
So I'm actually going to create a folder
to store all of these channel profile
pictures since we're going
to have a lot of them.
So I'm going to call this
channel dash pictures,
And I'll put this in there.
Now we're ready to create our layouts.
So let's go back to our final design
and see what kind of layouts we have.
So we're going to have a vertical
layout, that's one and two,
so two rows. And then
inside the second row,
we're going to have a horizontal
layout, which is one and two.
Now, inside the second horizontal layout,
we're going to have a vertical
layout one, two, and three.
So that's how we're going to
break down this design. And again,
don't worry about the video time here.
We're going to recreate
this later in the course.
Let's go into our code and
we're going to implement that.
So make sure that we have our
project open on the left here.
And we're going to start by
creating some vertical layouts.
To create a vertical layout.
We're going to create two divs.
So this is going to be
our vertical layout.
Now remember that divs are
block elements by default,
so they're going to take up the entire
line and appear one on top of another.
And that's exactly what we
want for a vertical layout.
So let's look at our design. Here.
We have the image in the first row.
So I'm going to move
this up, Cut and paste.
And then in the second row
we have everything else.
So I'm going to put everything
here in the second row.
So cut and paste.
Let's save it and refresh.
Now we're going to create a
horizontal layout down here.
One column's going to have
the channel profile picture,
and the other column is
going to have the text.
Let's create the channel
profile picture. First,
we're going to create an image element.
We're going to give it the source
Of the picture that we
downloaded in the beginning.
So that picture is in this folder. So
we're going to go into this folder first,
which is channel dash pictures.
And then remember to have a
slash to go into that folder.
And then channel one jpeg, save it.
And now if we look at our current website,
the image is actually in its own row,
and that's because the
paragraph is a block element,
so it has to appear on its own line.
We're going to change this by creating
a horizontal layout, like one and two.
So to do that, we're going to
create two divs. Here's one diviv,
and here is another diviv.
Now the difference here is that we're
going to make these divs inline block
elements.
So remember that inline block is what
allows elements to appear beside each
other like this,
while block elements force the element
to take up the entire line so they will
appear vertically.
So we're going to make these two divs
inline block elements to create our
horizontal layout. Let's reference
our design first. In the first column,
we have the channel profile picture.
So I'm just going to move this
Into the first diviv here.
And then in the second diviv,
we have all the text. So I'm going
to move all of the text here,
cut and paste.
Now let's make these divs inline blocks
so that they appear next to each other.
I'm going to give a class so
that we can target it with css.
Let's call this the channel picture.
And then we're also going to give a class
to this div so that we can target it.
Let's call this the video dash info.
And now in our css,
we're going to make the channel picture
picture display in line dash block.
And we're also going to make the
video info display inline block.
So they appear next to
each other video dash info
display in line block,
save it and refresh.
Now you'll notice that they're
still on top of each other,
and that's because divs by default
have a width of a hundred percent.
So we need to decrease the width of these
two divs so that they appear next to
each other. So remember that for the
video preview card. So this whole thing,
we set the diviv to 300 pixels,
and that's how they can
appear beside each other.
So we're going to do the same thing
for our horizontal layout down here
for the channel picture,
let's set a width of 50 pixels.
And then for the video info,
we're going to set a width to 200 pixels.
So this is the first column
of our horizontal layout.
It's going to take up 50
pixels like this, and then
this is the second column.
It's going to take up 200 pixels.
It's going to appear beside the first
column because both of them are display
inline block. So let's save this,
and you'll notice it looks really weird.
So let's look at our code
and see what the problem is.
I'm going to scroll up here,
and you'll notice that we set
the width of the video title,
which is this text to 300. So
we're forcing it to overflow here,
and that's not what we want.
So we just need to remove this
and not force the width.
So if we don't force a width of 300,
the paragraph will just take up
the entire space of the container,
which is 200 pixels.
Now the second thing we notice is
that this image is overflowing,
and that's because images by default,
they overflow.
So they keep their original dimensions,
so they keep their original size
and that causes them to overflow.
So we want to resize this image so
that it only takes up 50 pixels.
Let's go ahead and do that right now.
Let's give it a class so
that we can resize it.
And I'm going to call this
the profile dash picture.
And then I'll scroll up
here dot profile dash
picture.
And then I'm going to resize the
width to 50 pixels so that it
fits exactly this
column. Going to save it.
And now that looks pretty good.
We can actually see the layout
in our browser by right clicking
inspect and finding this html.
So I can click this top left
icon and just click this picture.
So I'll show you what it
looks like in the html.
So here we have a vertical
layout, so one and two,
and then here we have
horizontal layout one and two.
Now, a better way to do this is actually
to set this to a hundred percent.
So this means the image will take up
the entire space of its container.
So if we look at our html, this
image is inside this container.
If we set it to a hundred percent, it'll
take up the space in the container,
which is basically the 50 pixels
that we have here. Let's save it.
Next. Remember that we've seen this
problem before, they're not aligned.
So we're going to align this
inline block element to the top.
To do that, we're going
to use this property here,
vertical align top that we've seen before.
So vertical dash, align, top,
save it. All right, so we're almost there,
but notice that these two aren't aligned.
This paragraph has some margin at the top.
Remember that paragraphs by default
come with margin at the top and at the
bottom.
So we're going to go into our code and
we're going to get rid of this margin at
the top. So let's scroll up. Oh,
so we actually deleted that style.
So let's create a new style here.
We're going to target
the video dash title.
We're going to target the
class video dash title,
set the margin dash top two zero,
and that's going to
eliminate the space up here.
So I'm going to pause here because we've
actually created the nested layout that
we need. Let's look into our
H T M L in the dev tools.
And if we look at this video preview,
we have a vertical layout one and two.
Inside the vertical layout, we have
a horizontal layout one and two.
And then inside our horizontal layout,
we have another vertical layout,
1, 2, 3.
So that's a practical example of using
the nested layout technique to create a
layout that's a similar shape to this.
The only thing that's left to do
is to style our website with CSS
one by one until it looks like this.
So we're going to do that right now.
So let's go into our code, and we're
going to style these elements one by one.
So I'm actually going to move this down
here so that I can see it a lot easier.
So the first thing I noticed
is that the image is round.
So remember to create a round
image or round anything,
we're going to use rounded corners.
So we're going to set
the border dash radius to
let's say 20 pixels. Save it.
So we have rounded corners,
and it's getting more round,
but it's not a full circle yet.
So let's set this to maybe 50 pixels.
So now it looks a little too big.
Let's set the width to
something like 40 pixels.
I think that looks pretty close and
we can always change it later. Next,
there's some spacing between the
first row and the second row.
So let's go in here. I'm
going to set a class here.
Call this the thumbnail dash row.
And then we're going to
style this thumbnail row.
And remember to add spacing
to the bottom, we add margin
dash bottom, and let's add
a margin of maybe 10 pixels.
Save it. Okay, maybe 12 pixels.
Okay, so that looks good enough.
And finally, we can style the text.
So this YouTube project is actually
using the Google font called reto.
We learned in a previous lesson how to
load Google fonts and in particular,
how to load robo. So we're
going to do that again.
Let's go to a new tab.
We're going to search for Google fonts,
and we're going to load reto onto our
page. So if you don't have this here,
this is from my previous session,
we can actually search for robo
and then just open it here. And then
we select these styles that we want.
So I'm going to get the regular style,
and then this seems like a bolded font.
So I'm going to get the medium
font and the bold font just in
case. So I'm going to go up
to see the styles I selected.
And then that looks pretty good.
And Google will give me the code that
I need to load this onto my website.
So I'm going to copy this
and just paste it into my head section.
So right in between here. All right,
so now I loaded the robo font, and
we're going to use it in our page.
So we're going to target all
paragraphs and we're going
to change their font family to reto.
And we're also going to use a backup
font with this comma of aerial.
So this syntax here with a
comma is called a font stack.
This basically lets us
set up a backup font.
If for whatever reason Reto
fails to load from Google,
then it will fall back to our
backup font, which is aerial,
save it. Next,
I'm going to change the size of the font.
So let's change the video title to maybe
14 pixels. Save it. Okay,
I think that looks pretty good.
Next, I'm going to make it bold.
So font dash weight bold,
save it.
So this looks like it's a little
bit too bold compared to this font.
So I'm actually going to
change this valley to 500.
So if you recall, we actually
selected three styles of fonts,
the irregular 400,
medium, 500, and bold 700.
So when we set the font weight to bold,
it actually corresponds to a number,
which is 700. A regular
font weight is 400,
and a semi bold is 500.
So usually we use the number value
because it's a little more precise.
So usually instead of
typing font weight bold,
we wouldn't use font
weight 700. In our case,
our font is a little too bold, so
we're going to decrease this to 500,
which is the medium size that
we picked on Google fonts.
So let's save this. And
that looks pretty close.
Next, we're going to change
the space between the lines.
So remember the property to do
that, it's called line height.
And let's try 14 pixels.
That's not enough,
maybe 20 pixels. All right,
so I think that looks pretty
good and close to our design.
You might notice that the text here is
shorter than what we have in the design.
You may or may not see this because this
text actually depends on the size of
the webpage. So depending
on how wide your webpage is,
the length of this text will
change. And in our current website,
we actually haven't
implemented this resizing,
so we are going to fix this later. Next,
I'm going to style this paragraph.
So let's go into our HTML here
and look at the class name.
So it's the video author,
and it looks like we don't
have any styles for that yet.
So I'm going to write it down here.
So we're going to style the
class video dash author.
The first thing I notice is the
font size. So it's a lot smaller.
So font dash size. Let's try 12
pixels. Let's see how that looks.
Okay, so I think that looks pretty close.
And we're going to change the color.
Color. Now remember to get an exact color,
we can right click inspect spec,
and then click this top
left icon. Click this text,
go to the computer tab.
And if we scroll down,
we should get the text color right here.
So RGB 96, 96, 96, save that.
And if we go back,
okay, that looks perfect. Next,
I'm going to style this paragraph.
So in our code, this paragraph
is called video dash stats,
and I'm not sure if we have a style
for this. Doesn't look like we do.
So I'm going to write a new
one. so.video dash stats,
we're going to set the font size to
12 pixels because these two look the
same. Okay,
and then we're going to set the color
as well since these two look the same.
And now remember that whenever we have
these duplicate styles like this and
this, we can actually target
multiple classes by adding a comma.
So we're going to target the video
dash author class as well as the video
dash stats class.
So this is going to help us
reduce duplication of our code.
So I'm going to delete these lines,
save it, everything looks okay.
And the last thing we're going to modify
is the spacing between the paragraphs.
So remember that paragraphs by default
come with margin at the top and at the
bottom. Now, instead of
removing them individually,
I'm actually going to go up to the top
of our page. So we did this once before.
We're going to get rid of the default
margin for all paragraphs on the page.
So to do that,
we're going to go into these styles and
we're going to set the margin dash top
to zero.
And we're also going to set
the margin dash bottom two
zero. And this will get rid of
all the default margins. Save it.
And now we can set a more precise
margin at the bottom here.
So under the video title,
let's set a margin bottom of maybe 15
pixels. Save it. Okay, looks
like it's a little too much,
maybe 12 pixels. Okay,
I think that looks pretty good.
And now under the video author,
we're going to add some margin.
So currently we have some styles
that apply to both of these.
I'm going to target.video
dash author individually down
here. So for the video author,
I'm going to add a margin dash bottom
of maybe six pixels, save it,
and maybe four pixels. Okay,
so I think that looks pretty close.
And now if we look at our website,
you can tell that it's actually really
close to the final design that we have
now to finish off the second
video preview you have a choice.
You can either do everything that we did
in the code here to give yourself more
practice or if you want to save time
and move on to the next section,
we can just copy all of this
HTML and replace this part here
And then just swap out the thumbnail
as well as the channel profile
picture, which you'll need
to download first from here,
as well as swap out all of the text.
So I'm just going to fast forward this
video to finish up this second video
preview,
but feel free to pause it and try
yourself to give yourself more practice.
And there we go. In this lesson we
learn in the nested layouts technique,
which is one of the most important
techniques for being able to break down a
design that you see on a website
and recreate it using code.
In this lesson we're going
to learn about CSS grid,
which is a much better way to create
these horizontal layouts as well as to
create a grid like this that you
see in our final project. First,
we're going to open up the
website we were working on.
So I have it open right here.
And remember that for
our horizontal layouts,
we were creating them using something
called display inline block.
So if we go into our
code and we scroll down,
we were using display inline
block and a width to put these two
side by side.
Now there are some problems with display
inline block that I want to show you
right now.
We're going to set the background
color of these to gray,
so this will make it easier
to see what the problem is.
Now let's save it.
And now you can see that there's a
little bit of space between these two,
and this causes some alignment problems.
So the width of this entire
container here, the width here,
we set it to 300 pixels,
but we set the channel picture to 50
pixels here and the video info to 200.
So you would expect that we can actually
set this to two 50 to take up the
entire 300 pixels, but if I save it,
you can see that it's too long
and it wraps to the next line.
So we have to set it to something
like 2 45 and that will cause it to
appear beside each other.
So this is one problem with inline block
is that it has some alignment problems.
Now you might be wondering
where this space is coming from.
If we scroll down to our html,
we can see that there's actually
some space between these two divs,
and we learned earlier that H TML combines
multiple spaces together and that's
what shows up here. So we could remove
this and save and get rid of that
space, but that means our
code is less easy to read.
Now the second problem that inline block
has is that it's not vertically aligned
like you see here.
So now we're going to learn
a new technique called CSS
Grid that's going to help
us create perfectly aligned
horizontal layouts to learn grid.
We're going to create a new file where
we're just going to practice using grids.
So let's go into our code editor
and we're going to create a new file
called grid html.
And remember, for every HTML file,
we want the proper structure.
So at the top we're
going to have a doc type,
and then we're going to
have an HTML element.
And then inside we're going to
have a head element and a body
element. Now that we have
the proper structure,
we can open this file in live server.
So let's right click and
open with live server.
And then let's set the title
or the text in the tabs here
to two grid practice
so we know what this file
is about. Let's save it.
So I'm going to resize my windows here
just so we can see what's going on.
We're going to start off in the body
and we're going to create a diviv.
And then inside this diviv
we're going to create two divs.
So let's call this Diviv
one and let's call this
Diviv two. Save it. And
now to help us learn,
I'm actually going to show you
a new way of writing c s s.
So if we go to the opening tag here,
we can set a special attribute
called a style attribute.
Now the style attribute is unique
because it lets us write CSS code inside.
So let's write the code
background dash color light
blue,
And we save it.
We can see that these styles that we
wrote here are applied to this element.
So this code here is another
way of writing CSS called inline
styles. We're writing our
CSS inside a line of html.
We've already learned two
other ways of writing css.
One of them is the style element and the
other is to put our CSS in a separate
file. This is a third way of writing css.
Now generally we don't use this in Rio
websites because it makes our HTML harder
to read. In Rio websites, we put
our styles in a separate file,
but for now, since we're learning, this
is pretty useful because number one,
it only affects the element
with the style attribute.
And the other thing is that the
CSS code is right beside our HTML
so that when you go and
review this file later,
it's very easy to see what's going on.
So let's practice with
the style attribute.
We're going to add another
one to this second div.
So let's set this style
to background color,
and we'll set a background
color of light pink.
Let's save it. And now we have the
two divs we're going to work with.
Now, currently we just have
two divs inside another.
There's nothing new going on here, but
now we're going to create our first grid.
So what is a grid? A grid is a
layout that has rows and columns.
For example, this is a two by three grid.
We have two rows and three
columns. This is a one by two grid.
We have one row and two columns.
So we're going to learn how to make
this kind of structure in our html.
To do that, we're going to style
this outer diviv or the container.
So let's see how that works. We're
going to set a style attribute here.
And to create a grid, we're
going to need two steps.
The first step is to set
the display property,
and we're going to set display to grid.
The second step is we need to set
how many columns our grid has.
So to do that we're going to use
this property grid dash template,
dash columns,
and we're going to give
this property two values,
100 pixels and 100 pixels.
So these two values define
how wide our grid columns are.
The first column is going to
have a width of 100 pixels,
and the second column is going to
have a width of 100 pixels as well.
And our grid will have two
columns. So if we save this,
you'll see that we created
our first one by two grid.
Now I want to point out a few
characteristics of a grid. First of all,
notice that this diviv is no
longer taking up the entire line.
So recall that divs are
displayed blocked by default.
They're supposed to
take up the entire line,
but when this element is inside a grid,
it's actually placed into the grid,
so it only takes up the
entire column instead.
The second thing you'll notice is that
there's no extra space between these two,
unlike with display inline block.
And the third thing to
notice is that, for example,
let's add another element into
the second. Let's add a paragraph
of text, save it when
we add more elements.
This makes the second taller than the
first one, but they're vertically aligned,
and that's another difference
between grids and display.
In line block grids maintain
alignment much better.
All right, so that is our basic grid.
Now we're going to create
another grid to practice with.
We're going to go into our code,
we're going to copy all of this,
and then we're going to paste it below.
And it's a little bit
weird, the formatting.
So we can select this and press
tab to move it back into a normal
position. Let's save it. And
now we have our second grid,
but let's actually add some space to the
top so that we can see it more clearly.
We're going to add some
margin dash top of 30
pixels. Save it. Okay,
that looks pretty good.
And this time we're going
to add a third column.
So this property actually takes any
number of values that you give it.
So if we add a third
value here of 200 pixels,
it's going to create a third
column that is 200 pixels wide.
So the number of values determine the
number of columns and the value itself
determines the width of the
column. So if we save it,
we do have three columns here,
but we only have two divs,
so we need another div to fill
out the third column. To do that,
let's copy our first diff,
and then we're just going to paste
it down here and call it div three.
So now we have three diffs to
fill out the three columns,
and you can see that our third column
is 200 pixels versus 100 pixels that we
saw right here. So let's actually
change the text here so that we can
see what's going on. So
100 pixels, 100 pixels,
and 200 pixels. Save it.
So now let's see what happens when
we add another div to our grid here.
So let's copy this second
diviv and then duplicate it.
Copy it and paste.
Can actually get rid of this
paragraph here and save it.
And now you can see that this fourth
diviv wraps around to a second row.
So whenever we have more elements
than we have columns here,
it starts to wrap around
and create new rows.
So that's the basics of how grids work.
Now I'm going to show you a special
value that we can use with grids. First,
let's copy this and then create
a new grid to practice with
space it here. And then
select this and tab.
And this time we're only
going to have two columns.
So let's get rid of this third column.
And let's only have two diffs here.
And we can also get rid of
this paragraph. For this grid,
we're going to have two columns.
The first one is 100 pixels,
and the second one, we're
going to change it to one fr.
So FR is a special value in
grid that stands for free space.
It means to take up the remaining
amount of space on this grid.
So if I save it,
you can see that the first column here
is 100 pixels and the second column
has a width of one fr.
So it takes up the remaining amount of
space that we have. If I resize the page,
it'll take up the remaining amount of
space. So that's what one FR means.
I'm going to change this to one fr so
that it's easier to see when we review
this file.
So this fr value is exactly what
we need in our final design.
If I open my final design,
you can see that we have
a horizontal layout here.
The first column is about 50 pixels,
and we want the second column to take
up the remaining amount of space,
which is exactly what
we need, one FR four.
Now before we go and update our project,
I'm going to show you another
property of this FR value.
Let's copy on this diviv
and create another grid
below it.
And this time we're going to add
a third column that is also one
fr. And I'm going to add another
diviv to fill out this third column.
Let's copy this and paste
it into a third diviv.
This one is also going to be
one F fr. So let's save it here.
And for this example, the second
column and the third column,
both have one ffr.
So one FFR tells the columns to take up
the remaining amount of space and the
number in front of it tells us relatively
how much of the remaining space
this column gets. Since in this
example, both of them are one,
they'll get an equal amount
of the remaining space.
So here these two are equal and
they take up the remaining space.
If we change the third column to two fr,
so let's change this to two fr and save.
The second and third column will
take up the remaining space,
but the third column will be twice
as wide as the second column.
So this number here is
sort of like a ratio.
This second column will have a
one-third of the remaining space,
and this third column will have
two thirds of the remaining space.
Now that we understand that concept,
we're going to go back into our project
and use grids to create this horizontal
layout instead of inline block.
Let's go to our code and we're
going to scroll down into the
H T M L for this which is right here,
and I'm going to collapse
it so it's easier to see.
We have the channel picture and
the video info, which is these two.
So to create a grid, remember we
need to create it on the container,
which is this diviv.
So let's set a class
name video dash info dash
grid, and then we'll target
this class in our CSS above.
Going to scroll up, and I'm going
to actually put it right here,
video dash info dash grid,
because this is right above the
channel picture and the video info.
So it's beside other related
styles. Now remember,
to create a grid, we need two steps.
The first one is to set the
display property to grid.
This creates our grid, and then we need
to set how many columns our grid has.
So we're going to set grid
dash template, dash columns.
And for our purposes,
let's set a column of 50 pixels
for the channel profile picture.
And then we want the second column to
take up the remaining amount of space.
So as we learn, that is
one fr. Now if we save it,
you'll notice that the space between the
inline blocks is gone. So unlike here,
and you'll also notice that
these two are vertically aligned.
So now that we have our grid,
we can actually remove all of these inline
block styles because we're not using
them anymore. So we can
actually remove all of these
and all of these. Let's save it.
And now let's set a grid for
the second video preview.
We're going to scroll down.
So remember we're going to set
the styles on the container here,
and then these two divs are
going to appear in our grid.
So we've already created
this CSS at the top.
We just need to set a class
of video, dash info dash grid,
save it,
and then all the styles that we
wrote up here will target that class.
So now we have both of our grids and
you can see our horizontal layout is
perfectly aligned with
the rest of our layout.
And now we can remove
this background color
and this part of the project is done.
The last thing we're going to learn about
grids is if we go to our final design,
we're going to learn how to
build a bigger grid like this. So
notice that there's a little bit of
spacing between the columns as well as
between the rows. Now before we start,
you might have a bigger screen and
you might see four videos in each row.
So for now,
let's actually resize the browser so
that we see three videos in each row.
So I'm doing this because not everyone
has a big screen to work with,
and this will make sure that
everyone can follow along.
So I'm going to zoom back in and just
make sure I have three videos in each row.
And we're going to learn how
to create this kind of layout.
Let's go into our grid practice file,
and we'll go back into our code
again and into our grid html file,
and we're going to create
another grid to practice with.
So let's copy this and then
just paste it down here.
And now for this example,
let's look at our final design.
We essentially want three
columns of equal size.
And when we resize the page, notice
that the columns resize as well.
So notice that if I resize too
much, it becomes two columns.
We're going to deal with
this later in the course.
We're not going to deal with that.
We're just going to deal with
three columns that we have here.
So for this layout, we want
something like one F fr, one F fr,
and one FFR to divide this space evenly.
Let's go into our file here and
we're going to set three columns,
one F fr, one F fr, and one ffr.
So this will create three equal
columns that will resize with the page.
Let's set this to one FFR as well
so that it's clear what's going on.
Let's save it.
And now we have the three columns
we're going to be working with.
Let's also set the height so that
it looks a little bit like our video
previews that we have here.
So let's go into our HTM file
and we're going to set the height
to 200 pixels.
And let's also set the height
of these other columns as well.
200 pixels and 200 save it. Okay,
so that looks pretty good, but
they're a little bit too much.
At the bottom of the page,
we're going to add some spacing at the
bottom of the website so that we can
scroll these up.
Let's go back up into our HTML and
we're going to scroll up to the body
tag.
We're actually going to add some spacing
inside the bottom of the body tag.
So remember that spacing on
the inside is called padding.
So padding dash bottom.
And let's set it to something
like a thousand pixels. So it's
a lot easier for us to practice.
So now that we have a lot of space at
the bottom, we can scroll all the way up
and see our grid clearly.
So remember that in a grid, if we have
more elements, then we have columns,
it'll start wrapping
around to the second row.
So all we had to do is add three
more divs. So we're just going to,
let's actually copy the pink one first.
Let's copy it and paste it,
and then we'll add a blue and a
pink at the bottom. So let's copy
and paste it.
So we just need six divs to work with
that have alternating colors like this.
So let's save it.
And now we essentially have our
video preview that we see here,
and we're going to learn how to create
these space between the columns and the
rows. So it's actually really
easy to create this space.
We just need two CSS properties.
The first one is called column dash gap.
So it's pretty straightforward
what this means.
We're setting some space or
a gap between the columns.
So let's set a column gap of 20 pixels.
Let's see how that looks. Save it.
And now all of our columns have a
gap, just like our final design here.
Next we're going to set the space
between the rows and we have
a similar and straightforward
property for that called row dash cap.
And let's set this to something
like 40 pixels, save it.
And now we have space between the
rows, just like our final design.
So that's how we create a grid like this.
First we define our three
columns. So in this case,
we want to divide it up into three
equal columns that resize with the page.
That's why we used one
ffr, one ffr, one ffr.
And then we just add some space
between the columns using column gap,
which creates this. And we add space
between the rows using row gap,
which creates this.
Let's go back into our website we were
working on and we're going to apply these
skills to here. Let's go back here.
We're going to scroll
down. And first of all,
let's just create six of these video
previews so we can organize them into a
grid that looks like this,
two rows and three columns.
So we're going to go into a code and
we're going to copy both of these
and we're just going to make duplicates.
So copy it and paste it.
So now if we save, we have four
and we're going to create two more.
So paste it again, save.
And now we have six.
So remember to create a
grid, we need a container.
So we need a container for
all of these video previews.
So let's create a diviv, and this
is going to be our container.
We're going to call this
the video dash grid.
And now let's move all of these
video previews inside our new grid.
Just going to move all of them,
cut it and paste it in here.
Let's save it. Scroll back up.
And now to create the grid,
we want to set styles on
this container element.
So let's go into our css.
We're going to target the video dash grid.
And remember we have two steps.
The first step is to
set the display to grid,
and the second step is to set how
many columns we have grid dash
template, dash columns,
and for our example,
we want three equal columns
that take up the entire space.
So let's set one fr, one fr and one fr.
Now if we look at our page, we now
have the three columns in our grid,
but you might notice that
if I resize this down,
it actually doesn't resize with the page.
So the reason this happens is
because if we go and scroll up,
we set a width on the video preview,
which sort of forces the width to be
300 pixels and earlier we also set
the width of the thumbnail to 300.
So instead of setting the width like
this, which will force the width,
we actually just want these elements
to take up all the space in the columns
that they're inside of. So to do that,
we can remove this property
here and let's save it.
And for images,
a weird behavior is that they always
keep their original size to get them to
fit inside their container or inside
the column of the grid. We have
to set a width of a
hundred percent save it,
and now they'll only take up a hundred
percent of their container. Now,
we also don't need the
display block here anymore,
so this image is taking up a hundred
percent. It's already on its own line,
so display block is not
necessary. So let's delete that.
And now we're going to deal with
this video preview with for this,
we can just get rid of the with
here and the display inline block
and also vertical line, which
relates to inline block.
And we can get rid of the margin since
we're going to create this space using
the column gap property
we learned earlier.
So let's just get rid of all of
these styles. And now if we save,
we can now see that our video previews
are fitting perfectly inside of our grid.
The final step is we're going to add some
space to the columns and to the rows.
So let's go into our CSS here.
And remember the two properties,
they're pretty straightforward
are column dash gap,
and let's set a column gap
of maybe 15 pixels. Save it.
Okay, let's compare that to our design,
and I'm going to resize it a little bit.
So I think this looks pretty
close to what we have,
maybe 16 pixels.
And then we're going to set a row gap.
Let's set a row dash gap of maybe 40,
save it and compare it to our design.
So I think that looks pretty
close to what we have now,
the design might look
a little bit smaller,
and that's because we
have the sidebar here,
but we're going to deal with that
in a later lesson. So for now,
this looks perfect.
The last thing we're going to do
is to swap out the thumbnails,
the channel profile pictures as well
as the rest of the text to match our
design. So I'll let you get some
practice doing that. Remember,
you'll have to download the thumbnail
and the channel profile picture first.
For now,
let's just do six of these videos and
then we can add the rest of them at the
end of the course.
So pause the video right now
and swap out all the thumbnails,
the channel pictures and the text, and
I'll see you back after you've done that.
So this is what it looks like
after I swapped everything out.
So that's the end of this lesson.
We learned about CSS grid,
which is a great way to create these
horizontal layouts that are perfectly
aligned and to create this
bigger grid that we see here.
Here's some exercises to get
yourself familiar with grids.
In this lesson we're going
to learn about Flexbox,
which is another way to create layouts.
And we're going to use Flexbox to create
the header at the top of the page.
So Flexbox is similar to CSS Grid. It
can create the same kind of layouts,
but it's more flexible just
like the previous lesson.
Let's go into our code and create a
new file just to practice Flex Box.
We're going to create a new file by
clicking this icon and let's call it
flex box dot html. And remember,
we always start with the HTML structure.
We're going to have a doc type
at the top and then an HTML
element,
a head element and a body element.
Let's save it. And now we
can open this in live server.
So right click and open with live server.
Now in this lesson we're also going to
compare Flexbox to grid to show what
these similarities and differences are.
So we're also going to go into our code
and open the grid dot html from the
previous lesson. And we're also
going to open this in live server.
So right click and open with live server.
Just going to move these beside
each other and resize the page.
And now we're ready to begin.
So we're going to start off
in our flexbox dot html.
And first we're going to go into the
head section and we're going to add a
title.
Let's call this flex box
practice and then save.
So this is just going to remind us that
this file is for flex box practice and
it's going to show up here.
Next we're going to go into the body
and start creating some flex boxes.
So just like for grid, we're
going to create a diviv,
and inside we're going to have two divs,
so diviv one and Diviv two.
So we're going to use inline CSS again
just like we did for grid like here,
so that we keep our CSS
code close to our HTML code,
and it'll be easier to understand what's
going on when we review this file in
the future. So insider diviv set a style.
And for this div we're going to set
the background color to light blue like
before. And then for the second diviv,
we'll also set it to light pink.
So style equals background, dash color,
light pink, save it.
And now we have the two divs we can
work with. So just like with grid,
Flexbox requires a container
or this outer diviv.
This container is going
to be the flex box.
And then these elements are going
to be placed into our flex box.
So now let's learn how to turn
our container into a flex box.
We're going to set a style here
and we're going to do two steps.
The first one is to set the
display property to flex.
This creates a flex
box. In the second step,
we're going to set the
flex dash direction to row.
This means we're going to align these
elements horizontally in a horizontal
layout.
So now let's save this file and we
can see the effect that Flexbox has.
So inside of Flexbox, these
divs, which are block elements,
don't behave like block elements anymore.
They behave more like
inline block elements.
They only take up as much
horizontal space as they need to.
Now compare that to grid where we
first set the columns and then the
elements went inside the columns. So the
layout is a little more rigid for grid.
If we go back to our flex box,
if we add some more text to
this first diviv and save
notice that it expands to take
up as much space as it needs to.
So this is a flexible box and
that's why we call it flex box.
Now there's one other thing I want to
point out about flex box is that if we
make this second diviv taller,
just like our grid example here,
the flex box will be vertically aligned.
Let's go into our code and let's
add a paragraph to make this diviv
taller. If I save it, you'll
see that it got taller,
but we still maintain vertical alignment.
So flexbox is another way to create these
horizontal layouts while maintaining
alignment. All right,
let's go through some more examples to
see these similarities and differences
between flex box and grid. We'll
start with these similarities. First,
we'll go into our code and we're going
to create another flex box to practice
with. So we'll just copy this
and then paste it down here.
I'm going to select this and
press tab. I'll scroll down.
So we'll also add some spacing to the
top of this because we want to make it
easier to separate.
So let's add some margin
dash top of 30 pixels,
save it. That looks pretty good.
And now for this first diviv,
we're going to set the
width to 100 pixels.
So I'm just going to organize my CSS a
little bit here and we're going to set
the width to 100 pixels and let's also
change the text to 100 pixels so that
we know what's going on. So let's
save it.
So now our first flex box
element is 100 pixels wide.
For the second diviv,
we're going to tell it to take
up the remaining amount of space.
So if you remember from grid,
that's equivalent to one fr,
we're going to learn how to do that in
flex box. So for this one in our code,
we're going to add a new
style and we're going to add a
style specific to flex box called flex.
And we're going to set this to one.
And we're also going to
change this text here to flex
one. Let's save it.
And now we can see that flex one causes
this diviv to take up the remaining
amount of space.
So Flex one is the flex box
equivalent to one FR in grid.
So let's go through another example.
We're going to copy this
and then paste it again.
And for this example, we're going to
add another diviv to the bottom here.
So let's copy this first diviv,
copy it and paste so that
we have alternating colors.
And then we're going to set the
flex on the second diviv to flex
two. And let's change
the text to flex two.
So you can see that flex two is
the equivalent of two FR and grid.
So two items that both have flex are
going to take up the remaining amount of
space.
But this number here tells us relatively
how much of the remaining space it
takes.
So this element with flex two is going
to take twice the amount of the remaining
as this element with flex one.
So the value here works the
same as E value with fr.
So you can see that the basic things
that we do with the grid we can also do
with flex box. Now let's
talk about the differences.
So if we go to our grid examples and
we look at that, this example here,
the layout is more rigid for grid.
If we go into our grid code and
we scroll down to this example,
which is right here, one FFR and two ffr,
you'll see that we first define three
columns and then these elements go into
those columns.
So if I move this element to the second
position, so I'm just going
to cut and move it down here.
This item is now going to go into the
second column and it's going to take up
one FR of space, even though
we wrote 100 pixels here.
So if I save this,
you'll see that this one FR element
goes into the 100 pixel column.
So it only takes up a
hundred pixels of space.
And the layout here is not
changing for flex box. However,
if we go to our flex box
example and our code,
if we change the order of the elements,
so let's cut this and paste
it down here, save it.
You'll notice that the
layout actually changes.
So this element here actually
keeps its width of flex one,
and then the second element keeps
its width of a hundred pixels.
So the elements take their width
along with them if they move around,
and that causes us to have flexible
layouts depending on how many elements we
have and what order they're in.
So that's the biggest difference between
flex box and grid.
So what's the advantage of having
a flexible layout like this?
Let's go to our final project and
we're going to resize the browser.
And you'll notice that in the header in
the right section we have four icons or
images. Now we could create this
horizontal layout using a grid.
However, when we're locked out of YouTube,
you'll notice that we
only have three icons.
So the layout actually changes because
we only have three elements now.
So this would be a great situation to
use flex box instead of grid when we want
a flexible layout
dependent on our content.
So that's the basics of how Flexbox
works to create layouts and the main
difference between Flexbox and grid.
We're going to go back to our practice
file and we're going to go through some
other examples of Flexbox to help us
build the header of our final project.
So first,
let's actually save this as it is
so that we get a reminder that the
layout is flexible.
I'm going to change this to light blue
and the other one to light pink so that
we have alternating colors
and it's easier to see.
All right, let's go
back into our grid coat,
and we're also going to move this
back into its original position.
So just to remind us that for
grid, the layout is more rigid,
let's save it. And now we're back.
So we'll go back to our Flexbox
file and our flex box html,
and we're going to do another example.
So let's copy this and we're going
to create another flex box to
practice with.
Now for these next examples,
we're going to use them to learn how
to create the header up here. So first,
let's create something
that looks like the header.
We're going to create a box
that has roughly the same shape.
So we'll go into our file here and we're
going to make this flex box have the
same shape as a header.
So let's set the height
to 70 pixels and let's
set a border so that we
can see the actual box.
So we're going to set a
border width of one pixel,
a border style of a solid color,
and we'll set the border color
to gray. And when we save it,
we can now see our flex
box using the border.
I'm going to add a little bit of spacing
to the bottom of the page here so that
we can scroll this up.
So remember to do that,
we're going to scroll up and add some
padding to the bottom of the body.
We're going to add a style to the body,
and we're going to add
some space to the bottom.
So padding bottom 1000 pixels,
and now we can scroll this flex box up
to the top so that it's easier to work
with. Now let's scroll back down to
the example we were working with,
which is right here. So
for each of these divs,
let's change the width to 100 pixels.
So I'll change this one to 100 pixels,
and let's also change
the text to 100 pixels
for this one's also 100 pixels
and the third one to 100 pixels.
Now let's save it. And we
have our three divs here.
So notice that these three divs
are aligned to the left side,
so we can actually change how they
are aligned horizontally. To do that,
we're going to use a flex box
property called justify dash content.
So this determines how these elements
are laid out horizontally. For example,
the default value is start. If we save it,
they'll be aligned to the
start or the left side.
If we change this to end now,
they will be aligned to
the end or the right side.
We can also change this to center
to put all of our elements in the
center. So that's how we control how these
elements are positioned horizontally.
We're going to go through
another example here.
We're going to copy this whole flex box
and we're going to create another one
below it. Let's copy it and paste it.
And for this one we're going
to set a special value of space
dash between.
So what space between does is that it
spreads out our elements evenly across
this horizontal space and to make sure
that there's equal amount of space
between each element.
So this is really useful if we
go back to our header to spread
out these four icons evenly.
Now the last example we're going to go
through for flex box is how to align
elements vertically. So let's copy
this again and create another flex box.
So let's copy this, paste it down here.
And for this one we're going
to set another flex box
property called align dash
items. So this determines how these
elements are aligned vertically.
The default value is stretch,
which you can see here the elements
are stretching to fill up the vertical
space, but we also have some options.
We can align them to the start,
so they will no longer
stretch to the vertical space.
They will just take up as much
vertical space as they need to,
and they will be placed at the
top or we can put them at the end,
which will place them at the bottom of
the container and we can put them in
the center,
which will place them vertically
centered. If we look at our final project,
again,
you'll notice that all of these things
in the header are vertically centered.
So now we learned all these skills that
we need and we're ready to build the
header for our project.
Let's go to the code for our
project we were working on,
which was YouTube dot html. And make
sure you have this open in your browser.
I'm going to resize the window here
and also the code editor so that it's
easier to see what's going on. As we code,
We're first going to create an element
at the top to represent our header.
So let's scroll down. And currently
all we have is this input.
So we're going to create a new diviv
and we're going to give
it a class of header.
So this diviv is going to represent
the header in the final project.
And now let's put our search
bar into our new header.
So we'll cut this and paste it in here.
Next. If we look at our final project,
the header has three sections.
We have a section on the left,
a middle section with the search bar and
the right section here with some icons.
So we're going to simplify this by first
creating these three sections and then
aligning them and then filling out these
sections with the appropriate elements.
So let's go back down here and we're
going to create three sections.
So we'll just use three divs here.
So let's call this class
equals left dash section.
We'll create another diviv, we'll call
it class equals middle dash section.
We'll create another div and
we'll give it a class of right
dash section
and we'll put the search bar into
the middle section Right here.
And now let's style this diviv so that
we have roughly the same dimensions.
So before we do that,
you'll notice that we already have
a lot of CSS code in this file,
and the best practice is actually
to put the CSS in a separate file.
So before we write even more css,
let's go ahead and put
this into its own CSS file.
So we're actually going to
have multiple CSS files,
one file for styles of the video
preview and another for every
style of the header.
So let's actually create a new folder
first to organize all of our different
files of css. So we'll create a new
folder and let's just call this styles.
Inside we're going to
create two CSS files.
The first one is going to
be called video dot css,
and the second is going
to be header dot css.
So first we're going to
go into our YouTube htl.
We're going to move all of this
into the video dot CSS file.
So let's move this into here.
Now all these styles for these videos
are separated into their own file.
Now if I scroll up to the top here,
you'll notice we also have
some styles for the header.
So this actually belongs in the header,
and we're going to move this
into our header dot CSS file.
So we're grouping related styles
together to make it easier to read. Now,
for the top of this file, again,
we have this code that targets
all paragraphs on the page.
So this is not actually
specific to our videos.
So I'm actually going to create
another file called general
dot css,
and that's going to contain all
the general CSS code like this
where we target all paragraph
elements on the page.
So move this piece of code into general.
So just like that,
we have three CSS files and they're
all very focused on one part
of our webpage. So this is
generally what we want to do.
We want to organize our code and separate
them into different files depending on
what the code does. Next,
we're going to go into our HTML file and
we can remove this and let's save it.
But now you can see that all of
these styles that we had are gone,
so we need to link them back
into our html. To do that,
we're going to create a link element.
We'll have an attribute of re,
which tells it what we're linking.
So we're linking a style sheet and we
also tell it what file we're linking with
hf. So here beside our HTML file,
we have a styles folder. So we're
going to first link the styles folder,
and then we're going to type a slash
to go into it and link general dot css.
And now we're going to link our
other two CSS files. So to do that,
we just need to copy and paste this,
and then we're going
to link header dot css.
And for the third one, we're
going to link video dot css.
And if we save it,
we linked all of our code in three
separate files and we're back to where we
were. Next,
let's focus on our header
styles and create our header.
We're going to go into this file And we
actually don't need this display block
anymore. So we use this to put
the search bar on a separate line,
but now the search bar is
inside a bunch of divs,
so the divs will create that
separate line for us. Now,
the one other thing that we had to do is
that notice that there is some spacing
on the left side, on the right
side and at the top. So by default,
if we right click and inspect
and we look at the body.
So the body element has eight pixels
of margin on every side by default.
Now to get a more precise design, we
actually want to set this to zero.
So we're going to reset
these default styles.
So we'll go into our CSS code and
we're going to go into the general file
and we're going to target the body and
we're going to get rid of all margins.
An easier way to do this is to set
the margin property and set it to
zero. So this will set all margins in
all directions to zero. Let's save it.
And now our elements are right
up to the edge of the page.
Next we're going to work on our header.
So I'm actually going to make this
wider so that we can have both of these
files on each side.
So we're going to have the HTML on
the left and the CSS on the right.
So the first thing we'll do is we're
going to add a height to this header so
that it looks like our design here.
So let's go into our header file. And
remember we set a class of header,
so we'll target that using dot header,
and we'll set a height of maybe 40 pixels.
Okay,
so let's compare that to our design.
Looks like our design is a lot taller.
Let's change it to maybe 55 pixels.
Let's compare that. So I'm just comparing
this to the bottom edge of here,
and that looks pretty good.
So next we're going to position these
three sections, the left section,
the middle section, and the right section.
So in our code,
we can't actually see the sections right
now because they don't have any content
in them.
Let's just call this the left
section and then add the text here
as well. The right section,
save it. And now we have
these three. However,
you'll notice that they're
being aligned vertically,
and that's because divs by
default are display block,
and we haven't made this
into a flex box yet.
So to create a horizontal layout,
we're going to turn our header
container here into a flex box.
We're going to set the display to flex,
and we're also going to set
the flex dash direction to
row to lay them out
horizontally slots safe.
And now our sections only take up as
much space as we need to as we saw in our
examples. Next,
let's give these a background
color so it's easier to see them.
So for the left section we're
going to target it And we'll set a
background dash color of light blue.
And for the middle section
we'll set a background
color of light pink.
And for the right section, we're going
to set a background color of light blue,
right section,
background color of light blue.
So now how do we create this layout?
So let's analyze it a little bit.
If we resize the page, notice that
this middle section is also resizing.
So to achieve this, we're going
to use a property called flex.
So if you recall in our examples, flex
takes up the remaining amount of space.
So if I look at the header
in our final project,
when I resize this right
section is not changing,
its width and neither is the left section.
So these will have a predefined width,
and then this will be flex
because as you can see,
it's growing as the page is being resized.
So that's an example of how to
analyze these layouts. Don't worry,
you'll get better with
more practice. For now,
we're going to do this example
together. On the left section,
we're going to set a fixed width.
Let's set this to maybe 200 pixels.
See how that looks. We'll
compare it to our design.
So it's actually a little too much.
I wanted to end right here
after the YouTube logo.
So we're going to go back and
let's change this to one 50 pixels.
And let's compare it. So
that looks pretty close.
For this middle section,
we wanted to stretch.
So remember the property to
do that is called flex one.
So now the middle section is
stretching. And for the right section,
we also want a fixed
width. So let's compare it.
We want it to be somewhere here.
Let's try setting a width of 200 pixels
and then let's compare these two. Okay,
so I think this is pretty close to
the structure that we have here.
So what we're doing is we're just
simplifying the structure into the bigger
picture, and then we'll go in
and add these smaller details.
Now we're going to set some spacing
on the left and the right side of this
middle section. So remember to do
that, we're going to set our margins.
So on the left side,
let's set a margin dash left of maybe
30 pixels, save it. And let's compare.
There's definitely more than 30 pixels.
Let's change it to maybe 70 pixels.
Save it and compare. So
this compared to this,
I think that's close enough.
So now for the right section,
we're also going to add a little bit
of space. So if we look at our design,
so it's less space than we have here.
So we're going to add a margin to
the right of the middle section,
and we'll set it to
maybe 30 pixels, save it.
And that looks pretty close to
what we have here, maybe 35 pixels.
Okay, so now if we resize our page,
you'll notice that the middle section
is growing and shrinking with the page.
And the right and left are
staying the same width,
which is exactly what we have here.
So there's one other detail we're
going to copy for this middle section.
Notice that if I resize the
browser and make it wider,
at some point the middle section stops
growing. So at roughly this point,
the middle section will stop growing.
If the browser gets wider and it just
keeps the same width and is centered
horizontally, we're going
to learn how to do that.
Let's go back into our project and we're
going to limit the width of this middle
section first.
So we'll go into our code and
the property to do that is called
max dash with.
And let's set it to 300 pixels.
So this property says the width
can be less than 300 pixels,
but as soon as it grows to be over 300
pixels, we're going to limit it to 300.
So that's what we see here. Now,
when we resize the browser
to be less than 300 pixels,
notice that it's shrinking and growing
again, but when the browser gets wider,
it's limited to 300 pixels
because of this line of code.
Next,
we want to distribute these three sections
evenly across our horizontal space.
So just like what we have here. Now
remember to do that in flex box.
We have an example here.
If we go back into our code and go
into our flex box practice file,
we can find that example in our code.
And remember that we achieved this
using a property called justify
content space between,
and we set this property
on our flex box container,
and that's what we're going to
do for our project right now.
So we're going to go up
to our flex box container.
Let's go back to our YouTube hdml
and to spread these out evenly
across the entire horizontal space.
And we're going to set
justify dash content space
dash between. Let's save it.
And now they take up the entire space.
So if we compare this to our design,
we'll notice that the middle section is
still a little bit too narrow compared
to our design.
So let's increase the max width here.
So let's increase it to 400
pixels, see how that looks.
Okay, so it's still bigger.
Let's increase it to 500 pixels.
See how that looks. Okay, so I think
that looks close enough to our design.
So this middle section in pink is
roughly equal to this middle section
over here. So that's
the end of this lesson.
We learned about Flex Box and we used
it to create the layout for our header.
So in this situation, we were
mostly focused on our content size.
We wanted to make sure the middle
section had a max width and at least some
space in between.
So that's why we used a flex box because
we were focused on our content size
first. And then the layout
doesn't matter as much.
We just use a flex box to spread out
our content evenly across the horizontal
space. So when we focus on content
size first, we use a flex box.
When we want to create a grid, we use
grid. And for most other situations,
for example, this horizontal layout
that we created in the layers technique,
we can use either grid or flexbox. In
most situations, they do the same thing.
So here are some exercises that you can
practice using Flexbox to get yourself
more familiar with how it works.
And now that we have the general layout,
we're going to finish up the rest
of the header. Before we do that,
we're going to download all of these
icons and images that you see here.
To do that, we're going
to right click inspect,
and then click this in the top left and
then click the icon we want to download.
And then we can find the URL down here.
I'm going to hover over it and then
click this link to open in a new tab
and then save it with control S.
So I'm going to save this in the
folder that contains our code,
which is this one. So
I'm going to save it.
And then in our code editor,
we should see this icon,
so we can collapse this by pressing that.
And then now we have our icon right
here called the hamburger menu.
Now looking at our header, we
have a lot of icons to download.
So let's organize them using a folder.
We're going to create a new folder,
and let's call this icons.
And we're going to put the icon
we downloaded into that folder.
So this one right here into this folder.
And now we're going to do the same steps
to download all of these other icons
and this image that we see here. So
we're going to do the same steps.
Click the top left and then click the
icon we want to download and we can find
the link here.
I'm going to fast forward the video here
because it's just a bunch of repetitive
steps, and we'll continue after
we downloaded all the icons.
So when you get to the notification icon,
don't worry about this
notification number here.
We're going to learn how to
do that in the next section.
And for this channel profile
picture, when I download it,
I'm actually going to save it in a
different folder from the other icons.
So if I download this here and save it,
I'm going to put this in the channel
pictures folder instead of the icons
folder, because technically
it's a channel picture.
So once we have all of that downloaded,
let's check in our code editor and we
should see all of the icons that we need
for the header inside the icons folder,
as well as the channel profile picture
on the right in the channel pictures
folder.
And now we're ready to complete
our header in our current project.
So in our left section we have this,
which is a called a hamburger
menu and the YouTube logo.
So N our HTML. In this
file, in our left section,
we're going to have an image and
we're going to tell it what to
load. So loading and SVG is the
same thing as any other image.
And we're going to go into the icons
folder and we're going to load the
hamburger menu dot svg.
And then we're also going
to load the YouTube logo,
which is right here.
So YouTube logo dot svg,
save that and look at
our webpage and refresh.
So the images are loaded, but they're
way too big. Let's make them smaller.
We're going to set a class so
that we can target them with css.
So hamburger dash menu. And for this one,
let's set a class of YouTube dash logo.
And now in our css,
let's go in here and target the hamburger
menu class.
And let's set the height to
something like 20 pixels.
And same thing for the YouTube logo.
We'll set the height to 20 pixels.
So that looks pretty good.
Now, if we look at our design,
we'll notice that these images are
actually aligned vertically in the center.
So in our flex box practice
file, we learn how to do this.
If we look at our code, again,
if we look at our flex box code,
let's scroll all the way
down to the last example.
We did this using a align items center,
so that aligns them vertically
in the center like this.
We'll go back to our header c s s
and just have this as a reference.
So for our left section, we're
going to set a line, dash items,
colon center. However, you'll
notice that it didn't do anything.
And that's because if we look at
our html. The header is a flex box,
but this left section
here is still a regular,
it's a element inside the flex box,
but this itself is not a flex box.
So Align items doesn't do anything
Now to fixes.
We can actually turn the left
section into a flex box using Display
Flex, And if we save it now
the left section is a flex
box, so align items will align
it vertically in the center.
So Flex Box doesn't
actually go down two layers.
It only affects elements on the first
layer like this Diviv and this Diviv.
If we go down another level, like
here, flex box doesn't affect it.
That's why we have to turn this into
a flex box as well in order to use
properties like Align Items center.
So this situation of putting a flex
box inside another flex box is totally
valid. If we want to target another
level of elements like this,
let's go into our design and compare it.
And you can see that for our design
there is some spacing on the left and
right of the hamburger menu.
So we can create that
right now using margin
dash left of 20 pixels
and margin dash right
of 20 pixels. So we'll add 20
pixels on both of these sides.
So if I go back and forth,
you'll notice that this icon is a
little bit bigger than our project,
so we can actually adjust our height here
to make our icon a little bit bigger.
We can maybe set this
to 24 and let's compare
it. Okay, so that looks pretty close.
So now I notice that this icon is a
little bit to the right of our website,
which is here. So you notice that
it's a little bit to the right,
we need to add more spacing.
So let's add margin left of
maybe 24 pixels. Save it.
Now if we compare the two.
So that looks pretty much close to what
we need and the YouTube logo is also in
the same place, so that's a bonus for us.
So now it looks like the left section is
pretty much done in our project and we
can get rid of this background
color that we were practicing with.
First. We're actually
going to remove the width.
So this width of 150 pixels is forcing
the left section to only end up here.
However, if we remove this,
the left section will stretch to contain
all of its content. So if we save it,
you can see that it stretches. Now
we can remove the background color
and that's done. Next we're going
to work on this middle section.
So for this middle section in
our design, we have an icon here,
a button here. And if we resize,
you'll notice that the search box also
resizes. So this search box is going to
grow with the rest of the page. So
we already learned how to do that.
As a reminder, it's flex one.
So first let's go in and create these
two buttons first because that's the easy
part.
Let's go into our code in
the middle section here.
After the search bar, we're
going to create two buttons.
So let's create one button here
and another button down here.
So inside this first button we're
going to have this search icon.
So if we go into our icons folder,
it's this icon here, search dot svg.
So we can create an image element,
source and icons slash search svg.
In the second button we're going
to have our voice search icon,
which is this one,
and we're going to create another
image element and we're going to load
icons slash voice search icon.
Now let's save it and
see how that looks. Okay,
so that didn't work out very well
probably because if you remember when we
loaded this icon here, it was super big.
So the two icons we loaded are probably
super big and we only see the top left
corner, which is empty.
So first let's make our icon smaller
and make our buttons a little bigger.
Let's go into our html.
We're going to add some classes so that
we can target it with css. It's class.
Let's call this the search dash button.
And let's call this one
the voice dash search dash
button.
So we're going to go to
the middle section here.
We're going to target
the search button first.
Let's set the height to something
like 40 pixels and set the
width to something like 60 pixels.
And for the voice search button,
if we look at our design,
it's pretty much round. So let's
target voice search button.
Let's set a height of 40
pixels and we'll set the width
to 40 pixels as well.
So let's save it. Okay,
so that looks super weird, but
we're going to fix this right now.
So remember that we want to align these
in the center vertically just like this.
To do that, our middle section
is also going to be a flex box,
and then we can use the align items
property that we use for the left
section.
So let's make this middle section
a flex box and we're going to set
display to flex and
we're going to set a line
dash items
to center just like our left section.
So now if we save,
you'll see that everything is aligned to
the center and now it's ready for us to
style. So there is one thing that I
left out which is flex direction row.
So this tells a flex box to lay
out our content horizontally.
And this is actually the default
value, so we don't actually need it.
I put it here just for our
practice code before our header.
We can be safe actually leaving that line
out and just having display flex and a
item center. So now
that the layout is good,
we're going to go back to our tried and
true method of styling this one by one
with css. The first thing I'm
going to adjust is this search bar.
So notice that it stretches to fill up
the content when we resize the page.
To do that, we're going
to go into our code,
we're going to target the search bar,
search dash bar right here.
And remember to
stretch it to take up the remaining space.
We're going to set flex one and save.
Now let's make the search
box similar to the design.
So I'm actually going to move this
here side by side so that it's easier
to copy from.
So I'll go back into my code and the
first thing I'll adjust is the height.
So let's set a height of 40 pixels.
That looks a little too much. Let's set
the height to 36. See how that looks.
So I think it's still a little
too much. Let's set a 2 34.
And that looks pretty good to me. Next,
let's adjust this placeholder text.
So to adjust the placeholder, we actually
need another sort of pseudo class.
So we're going to type dot search
bar to target the search bar,
and then we're going to type
colon, colon placeholder.
So this is how you target the placeholder
on an input element like this.
So first, let's set the font dash family
to the one we're using for this
page. If we go to general css,
we're using Reto aerial,
so we're going to set
that to Roberto Aerial,
save it. So the font changed a little bit.
We're going to change the
font size to make it bigger.
Font size 16 pixels. Let's see.
Okay, I think that looks a little bigger.
And the next we'll notice that on the
inside of this input we have a little bit
of space, while we don't
have that much space here.
So we're going to set some padding
on the left of our search bar.
So let's set the padding
dash left to 12 pixels,
save it. Okay, that looks okay.
Let's actually set it to 10 pixels.
And then when we start
typing into the search bar,
notice that the font is bigger,
but for here we still have the small font.
So we can set the font size
to 16 pixels, see how that looks. Okay,
so that looks pretty
close to what we have.
And next I'm going to change the border.
So I'll set the border
dash width to one pixels,
the border style, we want it to be solid.
And finally I'm going to set
a border dash color of gray.
Let's see how that looks. Okay,
so I can't really tell the
color because of the background.
We're going to remove this light pink
background because we don't need it
anymore. And that looks a little too dark.
So I'm going to pick something
lighter, maybe something like this
save. And I think that's
close enough to that. Next,
let's adjust the height again,
because when we set the border,
it actually made it a little bit smaller.
So we'll set the height to 36
and now aligns with the buttons.
And I'm also going to
create rounded corners.
So that property is border dash radius.
Let's set it to two pixels.
Now the last style we're going
to adjust for this is the shadow.
So if we zoom into this search box,
there's actually a little bit of shadow
in the inside while our search box does
not have that. So we'll go back into our
code and we're going to add a shadow.
So we're going to use this from one
of the very early lessons box dash
shadow.
And if we want a shadow on the inside
of the element instead of the outside,
we just need to set
inset at the beginning.
So this will put this
box shadow in the inside.
Now we have our usual values,
which is the horizontal position.
So let's set it to one pixels.
So it's going to be moved one pixels
to the right and the vertical position,
let's set it to two pixels.
The shadow will be moved two pixels
to the bottom. Let's set a blur of
maybe five pixels and we'll
set the shadow color to R G
B A 0 0 0, which is black.
And then transparency set
to only 0.15 to get a very
transparent black. So let's save this.
So that's way too much.
Let's actually reduce the blur to
three pixels maybe and then change
this to 0.05. So we're doing a
lot of trial and error with css,
which is normal. So I think this
looks pretty close to our design.
I think it looks close enough for now
we're going to move on and style the
buttons. So first,
let's resize this icon inside the button.
So let's give this a
class of search dash icon,
save it,
and then in here in the dot search icon,
we're going to make it a little smaller.
So let's set the height to 20 pixels,
see how that looks. Okay, so that looks
too small. I'm going to try 25 pixels.
All right, so that size
looks pretty similar.
Now you'll notice that this one is
vertically aligned while ours is not.
So we can either turn the search button
into a flex box or we can just do a
simpler solution.
We're going to add some spacing to
the top of this icon to push it down.
So margin dash top of maybe four pixels
to push that down just a little bit.
Okay, so I think that looks close enough.
Let's finish off this button. We're
going to set a background color
of gray,
and then I'm going to adjust it to match
that. So I'm going to pick something
like this, maybe two 40
and then save it. That looks pretty
good, but now our borders are messed up.
So we're going to set the
border border with of one
pixel border dash style of
solid color and border
color is going to be the
same as our text box. So we can
go up here and just copy that
and right there, save it. And there we go.
That looks pretty close right now.
So now we want to move this button into
this input element a little bit like you
see here, so that we only have one
edge to do that. Here's a little trick.
We can set some spacing on
the left, some margin left,
except this time we're going
to add negative spacing.
So we're going to add negative one
spacing, normal margin adds space,
and it pushes the element negative margin
subtracts space and pulls the element
to that side. So margin left of a negative
number, we'll pull it to the left.
So let's pull it to the
left by one pixel, save it,
and that looks really good.
Now we're going to make our
button a little bit longer.
Let's change it to 66. Finally,
we're going to style this
voice search icon first.
We notice that there's a little
bit of space between these two.
So let's set a margin on the
right side of the button.
So this time it's normal margin margin of
maybe eight pixels.
I think that looks pretty close.
I'm actually going to set it to 10.
And then for this button, I'm
first going to make it round.
So let's go into these styles of
this button. And to make it round,
we just have to make the
corners as round as possible.
Let's set the border radius
and I'm going to set it to 20 pixels.
So a trick here is that if you set
this to half the width of the height,
it will make it round. So let's save
this. And now we have a round button,
but we have a weird border.
Let's actually get rid of it
because it's not in our design.
So border and none to
get rid of the border.
So it's looking really close. Our icon
is a little bit bigger than this one,
so we're going to target it in here.
Class equals voice dash, search dash icon,
and then NR css. We'll
target that. So voice dash,
search dash icon. So for this,
let's set a height of maybe
20 pixels. See how that looks.
It's a little bit small.
Let's increase it to 24.
I think that looks pretty good.
And next we're going to
try to vertically align it.
We're going to add a little bit of
margin on the top to push it down.
So margin dash top and four pixels.
Okay, that looks pretty good. The last
thing is to change the background color.
So we're going to change the
background color to let's
say gray. And then I'll
pick another color.
So this time let's pick maybe 2 45
and then save. Oh, so I
accidentally put it on the icon.
We actually want to put
this on the entire button.
So I'm going to cut and paste
this onto the button styles.
Let's save. And I think
that looks pretty close.
So this color is a
little bit off from this,
but I think it's okay if we
look at the bigger picture.
So now we've completed the middle
section and you can compare it here
to here. So we're looking
really good so far.
Next we're going to
finish the right section.
So I'm going to put them side by side
again so it's easier for us to copy.
So the right section has
three icons and an image.
So we're going to add
them to our HTML first.
So let's go into the right section here.
And we're going to create an image
and we're going to load this,
which is the upload icon.
So icons slash upload
dot svg, and then we'll
add another one. So image.
And this one is going to be icons slash.
This one is called YouTube apps svg.
And then the last one is the
notification icon, which is here.
So image element.
And we're going to load
icons slash notifications
svg.
And finally we're going to create another
image and we're going to load this
channel profile picture. So source.
And this one is located
in a different folder.
It's in the channel pictures folder,
and it's called my channel dot jpeg.
So let's save it refresh. And again,
our SVGs are massive, so let's go
ahead and resize them in our css.
So first, let's add classes
to all of these images.
So we're going to set this
one to upload dash icon,
so upload dash icon. The next one
is going to be YouTube apps icon.
So class equals YouTube
dash apps dash icon.
Next one we'll do notifications dash icon.
So class equals notifications dash icon.
And lastly, we're going to name
this a little bit different.
Let's give it a class and let's
call this one current dash
user dash picture so it's a little
more clear that this is different
and we can target it with css.
So let's go down into the right section
here and we'll scroll up and we'll
first resize the icons.
Let's resize the upload icon.
Let's set a height of 24
pixels and then we'll do the
YouTube apps icon that's set a height of
24 pixels. And then
the notifications icon,
which is right here. Icon.
Let's set a height of this 24 pixels again
and the current user picture. So
notice it's a little bit taller.
Let's target that current
dash user dash picture,
and we're going to set a height of 32
pixels to make it a little bit taller.
Let's save it. And now we have
the icons we're going to use.
Again, we want to align these
vertically in the center.
Remember to do that we're going to
scroll up to our middle section,
which is all the way up here.
We first have to turn this
container into a flex box,
and then we can use online item
center. So inside our H C M L,
we have to turn this into a
flex box. Let's scroll down
to the right section styles here.
We're going to turn
this display colon flex,
and then we're going to set
align dash items colon center
to align them vertically.
So let's save it. Okay,
next we want to distribute them
evenly across the horizontal space.
And remember from our practice code,
that one's called justify
dash content space
dash between. Let's save it.
And now these icons are space
evenly across the space,
so it looks like they're a little
bit too far apart from each other.
We can adjust that by adjusting the width.
So let's decrease the width to bring
everything closer together to match our
design. And I actually think this,
all the icons look good enough.
The only last thing we're going
to change is this picture here.
So notice it's still a square. We want
to make it a circle. So as a review,
we're going to use border
radius to make it a circle.
So let's set it to border radius.
And the trick we learned is half of
this will make it round. So 16 pixels,
save it. And now we have a round
channel profile picture. Lastly,
we're pretty much done with this so we
can get rid of the blue background color.
So we'll scroll up and get rid of this.
Now I actually noticed that we have
spacing to the right here in our design.
So that's one thing I missed.
So let's add that right now.
So we're going to add margin
right to this section of
maybe 24 pixels. Save it.
And I think that's a little
too much. I can't really tell.
Let's send it to 20 just to be safe.
Okay, so I'm happy with how this looks.
All right, so that's basically
the content in our header.
If we look at it right now,
it looks really professional.
So I know that while we were working
on it, it looked a little bit weird,
it looked unfinished, but you
just got to trust the process.
And at the end we have a
really professional result
that looks like our design.
Now there's going to be one
last case I'm going to show you,
and this is a weird behavior of flex box.
So if I resize my browser
and I make it smaller,
notice that these icons start
to get closer to each other.
So this happens because
flex Box is flexible.
When we start not having enough space,
it'll start shrinking the items inside.
But if we look at our final
project and we shrink the browser,
notice that this doesn't shrink and we
sort of forced only the search bar to
shrink. So let's go back into
our project and into our code.
And Flexbox has a special property to
prevent certain items from shrinking.
So we're going to scroll down
to the right section here.
And to prevent the right
section from shrinking,
we're just going to set this
property flex dash shrink
colon zero. So this means
that no matter what happens,
we're going to keep this width
and we're not going to shrink.
So zero means don't shrink if we save it.
And now you're going to
see that it doesn't shrink,
but now when we resize it,
notice that the search bar
doesn't actually shrink all
the way like our design.
So the way to achieve this is to go
into our HTML and then we're going to
go into our search bar,
which is right here.
So normally search bars have a default
width and we can't really see that
because we set flex to one. So
it's sort of growing with a page,
but as soon as it hits that default
width, it's not going to go down anymore.
So to remove that default width,
we can just set width to zero,
we save it,
and now you can see that the search
box will start shrinking as much as
possible. So to recap,
we set flex shrink of zero to this
right section so it doesn't shrink,
and then we set a width of zero to
the search bar so that it does shrink.
Here are some exercises to get yourself
familiar with using Flexbox to create
flexible layouts.
Now we're going to learn the last major
skill that we need to finish off our
project. We're going
to learn CSS position.
So position helps us do things like keep
the header at top of the page while we
scroll. It also helps us keep the
sidebar at the top of the page.
And lastly,
whenever we see an element on top of
another element that's using CSS position,
for example here, the video
time is on top of the thumbnail,
the notification number is on top of
the icon. And when I hover over this,
we have a tool tip on top of the page.
So CSS position adds another
dimension to our page.
So just like the previous lessons,
we're going to create a new HTML file,
just a practice position. I'm
going to go into my code editor,
we're going to create a new file and
let's put it right here beside the other
ones new file. Let's call this position
html. Now as always,
we're going to start
with the HTML structure.
So we're going to have doc
type at the top and then an
HTML element inside we have a head element
and then we have a body element.
Now we can right click and
open with live server and we're
ready to begin. So first,
let's add a title so that we
know what this HTML file is
for. Let's call this position practice.
Say save it, and then
it should show up here.
We're going to start in the body again,
and we're going to create two divs.
It's called this diviv one
and another diviv Diviv two.
And I'm just going to resize this a
little bit so we can see it side by side.
So just like before,
we're going to use inline styles so
that our CSS is close to our HTML code.
I'm going to set a style
and then we're going to set this
one to background dash color and
light blue.
And we're going to set the height and
the width to 200 pixels. So height,
200 pixels and with 200 pixels.
Next we're going to set the
second diviv to be the same size,
but with background color light
pink. So again, we set a style
and then we set a background
dash color of light pink
height of 200 pixels and width of 200
pixels.
So CSS position is just
the position property.
So let's go into our first diviv and
we're going to set the position property
to static And then save.
So position static is
the default position.
It's the same thing as if you
don't have this line at all.
Now we're going to learn a second position
property that allows us to stick an
element to the top of the page
like this while we scroll.
And that is called position fixed.
So we're going to create a new element
at the top here and let's call this our
header. So we're going to learn how to
create something that works like this.
So for this diviv, we're
going to set a style
of background color,
black and a text color of white.
And now we're going to learn how to
stick this to the top of the page.
So first of all, we need
to be able to scroll,
and right now I don't have enough
content to make the page scroll.
So what I'll do is we'll go to the body
here and we're going to set a style.
And then inside the body we're going
to set a style of height and something
really big, like 3000 pixels.
So we just need to make sure that
we're able to scroll this page. Next,
we're going to make this header
stick at the top. To do that,
we're going to use the position property,
and this time we're going
to set a position of fixed.
Now when I save it and I start scrolling,
notice how the header element is
sticking to the page when I scroll.
So that's how we make it stick.
So the first thing to note is that
when we set position fixed like this,
it doesn't take us space on the
page anymore. So before we add this,
and if I save it,
so notice that it takes up the top of
the page and then these two divs up here
below this header. But
when we add position fixed,
it no longer takes up that space at the
top of the page because it's sort of
floating above the page now. So
that's one way to think about it.
So the position property has four special
properties we can use to move this
element around. The
first one is called top.
The way that top works is that we can
set a pixel measurement. For example,
if we set zero pixels,
this is going to make the top of our
element zero pixels from the top of our
browser window here. So if I save it,
notice that the top of our element is
right on the top edge of the browser
window. If I set top to 10 pixels,
the top of our element is now 10 pixels
from the top of the browser window.
So top specifies how far away our
element is from the top of the window,
the next property we can set is left.
So if we set left to zero pixels,
then the left side of our element will
be on the left edge of our window.
If we set left to 50 pixels, for example,
now the left side of our element will be
50 pixels from the left of our window.
So left tells us how much space is between
the element and the left edge of the.
So we can set this in all four
directions we've seen top left.
We can also set bottom.
And right now a special feature
of these properties is that if
we set it in opposite directions, the
element will stretch. So for example,
if we set it to left,
and so these two are opposite directions
and we set the right to 50 pixels,
notice that the element stretches.
So now this element is 50 pixels
from the left of the page right here,
and it is also 50 pixels
from the right of the page.
So it will stretch the element
to meet these two conditions.
Same thing with top and bottom.
So if I set bottom to
100 pixels and save it,
the element will stretch so that it is
10 pixels from the top and it is 100
pixels from the bottom.
So this is how we move this element
around and resize it with position fixed.
Now let's try creating the
header that we see here.
So as you can see for this header,
it's at the top edge of the page.
It's also on the left edge
and on the right edge.
So that means that it's zero
pixels from the top as a shorthand,
we can just write zero.
It's zero pixels from the left and
it's zero pixels from the right.
Now for the bottom we might first try
to calculate how far the bottom of this
element is from the bottom of the page.
Now that's not going to
work if we resize the page,
so we need a different approach. So first,
let's save this file and
go into our practice file.
So now you can see that this
element is sticking to the top,
the left and the right, which
is what we have in our code.
Now we have to figure out the height
of this diviv. So in this case,
instead of using bottom, because
remember the bottom can resize,
we want to use simply height.
So in addition to these properties,
we can simply use height and
width to also resize this element.
It all depends on what
situation you're in.
If you want this fixed element
to resize with the page,
then you would use top
left, right, and bottom.
If you just wanted to have a specific
height or width and you don't want it to
resize, then you use height and width.
So here we're going to set the height
to 50 pixels and we don't want it
to resize with the page. So
that's exactly what we have here.
Now when we start scrolling,
you'll notice that our header
sticks to the top of the page.
So that's how we create something like
the YouTube header that we see here.
Now, one last problem is that
if we go to our practice file,
notice that if we scroll right to the top,
the header is covering our first diviv.
So we need to add some spacing at the
top to push our content
down below the header.
To do that, we go into our code,
and the first thing you might think
to do is to add margin to the top.
So we're going to add spacing to the top,
and let's add a little more
than 50 pixels, so 60 pixels.
So if we save it and make sure you scroll
up all the way to the top of the page,
you'll notice that we have 60
pixels of space at the top,
and now our content is
not covered by the header.
Now this is not the best solution
because if our content order changes,
for example, if I move
this diviv down here,
notice that it doesn't work anymore.
So what we want instead is to always
have space at the top of our page
regardless of what the content is.
So if I move this to the top here
and remove margin top, I'm going to
show you the proper way to do this.
So to properly handle this situation,
we need to add spacing to the body
element. So let's scroll up to the body.
So we have two choices for adding
space to the top of our page.
We can either use margin
or we can use padding.
Generally the best practice is to use
padding at the top. So we're just going to
add spacing on the inside
of our webpage at the top of
60 pixels, save it and
scroll all the way up.
And now we have plenty of space at the
top of the page and our header is not
covering our contents.
So now that we learn position fix and how
to move this element around and resize
it,
we're going to go into the project we
were currently working on and we're going
to put our header and stick
it to the top of the page.
So let's learn how to do that first,
I'm going to resize my windows a
little bit so it's easier to work with.
I'm going to put it right here.
And then we're going to open the YouTube
dot html file, which is our project.
So remember we put our
CSS into separate files.
So I'm going to open
the header dot CSS file,
and I'll put it on the side so
you guys can see it side by side.
So just like we learned, we're
going to go into the header here.
We're going to set a
style of position fixed,
and remember to move this, we're going
to use top, left, bottom, and right.
So top we want our header to
stick to the top of the page.
We're going to set that to zero.
We want our header zero pixels from
the left, so on the left edge of the
page and also zero pixels from the right.
And finally, we're going to set a
height. So we already have it up here,
so let's save it and see how it looks.
So the first thing we noticed is
that we lost our background color.
Now the only reason we had a background
color was because if we didn't have
position fixed,
this header takes space on the page
and the page happens to be white.
So the header appears to be white, but
now that it's floating above the page,
we'll notice that it's
actually transparent. So to
add our background color,
again, we just need to set
the background color property.
So let's set this to white, save it,
and now we're back to where we were.
Now if we go to our project
and we start scrolling,
you'll notice that our header
sticks to the top while we scroll.
So that's exactly what we want. Next we
have this problem where the header is
covering our content. So remember,
the way to fix this is to add
padding to the top of our body.
We're going to go into our code and
we're going to go into this file
general css. That's where
we have styles for the body.
And then we're going to set
a padding dash top of maybe
60 pixels. Let's take a look.
Okay, so that looks pretty good.
Let's compare to our design.
If I scroll to the top here and
just compare it a little bit,
I noticed that our videos are appearing
at a higher position than our design,
so we're going to push
them down a little more.
Let's set this to maybe 80 pixels.
Save it so we push them down even more.
And I think that looks
close enough to our design.
So the last thing I noticed is that
we're missing the border at the bottom of
our header here. So let's
go ahead and add that.
So let's go back into our header css.
We're going to add a border to the bottom
so we can actually add borders to one
side at a time. We don't have to add
borders to all four sides. To do that,
we're going to set these same
border properties we had before.
So we're going to start with border width,
but in the middle we're going to tell it
a direction. So we can tell it bottom.
We're going to also tell it top left.
So we have all these four directions.
In this case, we want
a border at the bottom,
and we're going to set it to one pixels.
And the other border
properties are the same.
So border style is going to be solid,
but we only want it at the bottom,
so it's going to be border bottom style.
And then lastly, border dash,
bottom dash color. And
let's set it to gray.
And I'm going to pick a
lighter shade of gray.
So maybe right there, save it.
Let's compare it to our design.
It looks like it's a little
darker than what we have.
I'm just going to adjust the
color to match our design.
And it's not going to be
perfect, but remember,
you can always inspect the design
and then make it perfect. Okay,
so now if I compare it, I think
that looks pretty close enough.
And now if I scroll, you notice that
the header is sticking to the top,
which is exactly what we want. Next,
we're going to how to create this sidebar.
So the sidebar is just like the
header, it sticks while we scroll.
So this is another
example of position fixed.
We're going to go back to our practice
file, and I'll resize my pages here
and I'm going to open position
dot html we were practicing with.
And this time below the header,
we're going to create our sidebar.
So let's create a diviv, and this
diviv is going to be our sidebar.
Now for the sidebar, let's set a style.
And then inside we're going to set a
background color of green this time.
So a background dash, color green,
and a text color of white so that it's
easier to distinguish between all of
these different elements. Next,
we're going to stick the
sidebar to our browser.
So remember to do that we're
going to use position fixed.
So position fixed and save it.
And now when we scroll,
you'll notice that the sidebar is
sticking to our browser while we scroll.
Lastly, we're going to put the sidebar
in the right place using top left,
right height or width. So let's
look at our sidebar. In our design,
we notice that the sidebar is sticking
to the bottom, so we want bottom zero.
It's sticking to the left,
so we want left zero.
And for the top it's actually not
reaching to the top of the page,
otherwise it would cover up the header.
So there's quite a difference between
the sidebar here and the top of the page.
So let's go back into our practice
file and learn how to position that.
Let's start with left.
We want the sidebar to stick
to the left side of the page.
So we're going to say zero
pixels from the left, save it.
Now we want our sidebar to
stick to the bottom of the page.
So we're going to say bottom
and zero pixels from the bottom.
And finally, we want it to be at the top
of the page, but not cover the header.
So let's set the top to 50 pixels.
So it's going to meet right
where the header ends.
We're going to set this to
50 pixels and then save.
And finally, we want to set the width
of the sidebar. So for the sidebar,
we don't want it to resize with the page,
so that's why we're going to use the
width property instead of something like,
right.
So let's go back into our practice file
and we're going to set the width to
maybe 72 pixels, save it.
And that looks like what we have
in our design, so that's perfect.
Now we have the same problem again
where our fixed element is covering our
content. So let's scroll back to the top.
We're going to add padding to our body
so that these elements are not covered by
the sidebar. So in this case, we
want extra space on the left side.
So I'm going to set padding dash left,
and let's set it to 80 pixels,
which is more than the
sidebars with 72 pixels.
So now if we save this,
we have 80 pixels of padding
on the left side of the page,
and now the sidebar is
not covering our content.
So that's how we position a sidebar.
Now we're going to create the
sidebar in our project here.
So let's go back into YouTube dot html,
going to resize my page so
that we can see it better.
And we're going to create
a sidebar on the left.
So let's go into our code and we're
going to put the sidebar right below our
header. So let's scroll
down below our header here,
and I'm going to create a diviv.
This is going to be our sidebar,
and I'm going to give a class of sidebar
so that we can target it in
our css. Now for these styles,
let's actually put them in a separate
CSS file. So if we scroll up to the top,
we have CSS files for our
header for our videos,
so it makes sense to split up our sidebar
styles into their own file so that we
organize our code better.
We're going to go into our code editor
and then go into the styles folder here.
And we're going to create a new file
and we're going to call it sidebar
css. And I'm going to put
it on the side like this.
Next we're going to load
sidebar CSS into our html.
So we just have to do one of these
again, I'm just going to copy them.
And then instead of video css,
we're going to load sidebar css.
And now we're ready to style this
sidebar that we just created.
So let's target the sidebar class
and we're going to set position
to fixed to make it stick.
Now for the sidebar, we want it to be
zero pixels from the left of our browser.
So let's set left to zero.
And we also want it to stick to the
bottom of our browser, so bottom to zero.
And finally, we want it
to stretch to the top,
but we don't want it to cover our header.
So let's set the top to whatever
the height of our header is.
So if we go to header
dot css, which is here,
we can check the height of
our header is 55 pixels.
So we're going to go into our sidebar
here and we're going to get the sidebar to
end 50 pixels or 55 pixels from the top.
So let's set that to 55 pixels, save it.
So with position fix,
the element is no longer on the page
anymore and it doesn't have a background
color, so we just have to set
that. Again, background dash color.
I'm going to set it to white, save it.
And now we have our sidebar.
The final thing is to make our
sidebar as wide as our design,
which is right here.
So we're going to set
the width to 72 pixels,
save it, and let's
compare it to our design.
And I think it's hard to see because it's
white here and it's a little bit gray
here, but I think that's close enough.
Now the next problem we have is that
the sidebar is covering our content.
So as we learn,
we're going to add some padding to
the left to push our content over.
So let's go into our general
styles. So general css,
and we're going to style the body.
We're going to add padding
to the left of our body,
and let's add padding of 80 pixels again.
And now our sidebar is no longer covering
our content because we added a bunch
of padding to the left of our page.
So that's how we use position fixed to
create elements that stick to the page
while we scroll, like our
header and our sidebar
for now,
here's some exercises that you can do on
your own to get a better understanding
of CSS position.
Now we're going to learn another
position property that we can use.
Let's go into our position, practice
file. And the same in our code editor.
We're going to open up position, HTML
and then close all of these files.
So I'm going to resize it so
that we can see it better.
So this time we're going
to learn position absolute.
Let's do an example to see how it works.
So let's scroll down and we're going
to create a diviv below our sidebar to
practice position. Absolute.
Let's create a diviv and then
let's call this absolute.
And now we're going to set some
styles on the diviv. So style equals,
and then inside here we're going
to set position with a value of
absolute.
And we're also going to set a background
color of red so that it's easier to
see. So background color of red, and
then the text color is going to be white.
So color of white, save it.
And now we have our position, absolute
element. So before we continue,
make sure we scroll all the
way up to the top of our page.
Now, position absolute also takes
the same values as position fixed.
So top, left, bottom and right
as well as width and height,
but they behave a little bit differently.
So first we're going to set left.
So let's set the left property
to zero and let's save it.
And now the left side of our element is
zero pixels from the left side of our
page. So this works the
same way as position fixed,
and we set left to 10 pixels.
Now there will be 10 pixels between our
element and the left side of our page.
Now let's try setting top. So I'm
going to set the top to 10 pixels,
save it and make sure you
scroll all the way up.
So you'll notice that our element is
now 10 pixels from the top of the page.
So mostly these properties work
the same as position fixed,
but with one key difference.
For position fixed,
the elements are placed in the browser
window while for position absolute the
elements are placed on the page.
Now what I mean by this is that
when we scroll the browser window or
just this visible part is not moving,
only the page is moving up and down.
So for position fixed, we're going to
put these elements on the browser window,
which doesn't move when we scroll.
So if we scroll up to the header,
if I say top and 10
pixels, this puts a header,
10 pixels from the top of the browser
window, not from the top of the page,
which is constantly moving up and
down. But for position absolute,
if we scroll down to there,
we're putting it 10 pixels
from the top of the page,
which scrolls up and down when we move.
So that's a key difference between
the two position fixed positions,
the element in the browser,
which doesn't move when we scroll
and position absolute positions,
the element on the page which
does move when we scroll.
So let's go back up and
reset this to zero so that we
have our proper header again and do some
more practice with position absolute.
So for example,
if I wanted to put this absolute element
in the top right corner here on our
page, we can do something like right,
and we'll put it 10 pixels
from the right and then top.
We can put it maybe 60 pixels
from the top, it was 60,
save it, and we scroll all the way up,
and that's how we place an element on a
precise location on our page like this.
And because it's on our
page when we scroll,
the page will move up and this absolute
element will move up with the page.
Now, one thing that's weird is that this
element is appearing above our header,
and that's because this element was
written in our code below our header.
So generally,
an element that is written below is
going to appear in front of elements that
are written above it. Now,
we can actually override this if we
scroll up by adding another property
called Z dash index.
So Z index determines which elements
appear in front and which elements appear
behind. So the default Z index is zero.
This is the same thing as if
you didn't have this at all,
but an element with a higher Z index
will appear in front of elements with a
lower Z index.
So if we set the Z index
of the header to one,
it's going to have a higher Z index
than the absolute element which has a
default Z index of zero. If we save it,
now the header will appear
in front. Just as an example,
if we scroll down and
we set the Z dash index
of this absolute element
and we set it to two,
now it's going to appear in front again
because our Z index here is greater than
our Z index here.
So usually we set this to something
like 100 so that we can have a lot of
elements in between. If our
page has a lot of layers,
and usually if we don't
care about the Z index,
we can just remove it and
have a default of zero.
Now that we learn position
absolute, where do we use this?
The truth is we don't use
it like this very much.
This is not a common situation that we
run into when we're creating websites.
However, position absolute has another
key feature that makes it really,
really useful to demonstrate.
We're going to take this element and
we're going to make a copy of it and we're
going to put it inside the sidebar.
So right here.
So we're going to put a position
absolute inside a position fixed.
So now when we save,
you'll notice that this element is
not being placed on the page anymore.
What it's actually doing is placing this
element relative to this position fixed
element. So now right of 10
pixels is actually 10 pixels.
From the right of the fixed element,
which is the sidebar top of 60
pixels is 60 pixels from the top
of the sidebar, not from
the top of the page.
So whenever a position absolute is
inside a position fixed element,
it's going to be placed a relative
to this position fixed element.
So this is the most important
feature of position absolute.
So let me show you why it's so useful.
Let's say that we wanted a close
button on the top right of our sidebar.
We want to be able to close
our sidebar if we want to.
I'm going to change this to an X so
that it's kind of like a close button.
And then to put it in the
top right of our sidebar,
we just have to set the top
to zero and the right to zero.
So if I save that, now this
element is in the top right,
and that's because if position
absolute is inside position fixed,
top zero means zero pixels from the
top of the position, fixed element,
right? Zero means zero pixels from the
right of the position fixed element.
So this is how we attach elements
to the corners or the sides of other
elements. If we look at our final project,
we can see that going
on in our videos here.
We have the video time in the corner
of our thumbnail here we have the
notification count in the top
right corner of this icon.
And using position absolute,
it allows us to put elements
in the corner like this.
So there's one last thing
we need to learn here.
We have a position absolute
inside a position, fixed element.
That's why we can put it in the corner.
But notice that this is still a position
fixed element and it sticks to the
page. But in our final project, these
videos are not sticking to the page,
they're scrolling with the page,
and we're still able to put stuff in
the corners. So how do we achieve this?
And to do this,
we're going to learn another value for
the position property called position
relative. We're going to scroll
down to our two divs at the bottom.
And for our second diviv,
we're going to set the
position to relative
and save it. Now, if
we go back to our page,
we'll notice that
nothing actually changed.
And that's how position relative works.
It's still displays the element as normal,
except if we put position
absolute in here,
it will position it relative to this
element instead of relative to the page.
So let's go through an example to
see what I mean. If I scroll up here,
let's copy this absolute element.
Let's copy it and then paste
it inside this position,
relative element, save it,
and then reformatted a bit,
press tab. And if we save this,
you'll notice that we get the same
effect as when we put position absolute
imposition.
Fixed right of 10 pixels now means 10
pixels from the right of the position,
relative element, not 10 pixels.
From the right of the page,
top of 60 pixels means 60 pixels
from the top of the position,
relative element, not 60 pixels
from the top of the page.
So two things are happening here.
When position absolute is
inside position relative,
this will be positioned on
the element, not on the page.
So that's what we just talked about.
The second thing that happens here is
that position relative causes this whole
element to display normally. So that's
what we get in our final project.
Notice that these videos are displayed.
Normally they scroll with the page,
but we have something in
the bottom right corner.
So these are all positioned relative.
And then to put something
in the bottom right corner,
we're going to put a
position absolute inside.
So let's actually go through an
example here. So we have our position,
relative element. We have
position absolute inside.
I'm going to put this in the bottom
right corner, just like our design.
So let's change this to five minutes
and pretend this is our final project.
Let's change the
background color to black.
And now we're going to put this
on the bottom right corner.
So let's get rid of this first.
And we're going to put this 10
pixels from the bottom of the
position, relative element. So
we're going to say bottom 10 pixels.
And we're also going to put it 10
pixels from the right of this position,
relative element. So right of 10 pixels.
And that's how we position
this in the corner.
And because this is positioned
relative, if we scroll the page,
it acts like normal content.
So now that we learned
the technique of position,
absolute inside position relative,
we're going to apply that to our project
and create the video time as well as
the notification number here.
So let's go back to our project
and we're going to add video times
first. So let's go to YouTube dot html.
And we're also going to open the
video CSS file. I'm going to put it
down here because we're working
with styles for the videos.
So first we're going to find our
thumbnail, which is right here.
And now remember to put
something in the corner.
We're going to need position absolute
inside a position relative element.
So if we look at our code, what could
be our position, relative element?
Well, it can't really be the image element
because image elements aren't really
containers. We can't
put something inside it.
So what we could use is
this thumbnail, row element.
This could be our relative element.
And then the video time will be the
absolute element inside of here.
So first, let's create our video
time. We're going to create a diviv,
and let's give it a
class of video dash time.
And then inside we're
going to put a video time.
So let's go to our final project and
we're going to copy one of these. So 14,
20. Then inside I'm going to put 1420.
Let's save it and go back. So
right now is just a normal diviv.
Let's go to our CSS file. And
we're going to style this.
Let's scroll all the way down,
and we're going to target
video dash time class.
And let's set the background dash
color to black and the text color
to white. So just like our final project.
So now we're ready to position it
properly. We're going to need position,
absolute inside position
relative. So first,
let's set the position relative on here.
We're going to scroll up to
thumbnail row, which is right here.
We're going to set position relative.
And remember, position relative
doesn't really change anything.
Everything appears normal.
That's one of the benefits of it.
And if we scroll down, we're
going to change this to position
absolute and now top, bottom, left,
and will be placed inside our
position relative element.
So if we save it, and now if we want
to put it in the bottom right corner,
we just have to say bottom
zero pixels from the bottom,
and also zero pixels from the right.
So let's set the position from the
bottom to maybe 10 pixels. Save it,
and let's set the position from the
right side to maybe five pixels. Save it.
Okay, let's change this
to maybe eight pixels.
So I think that looks pretty good,
and if we compare it to our final
design, it's in the right position.
So that's how we put an element
in the corner of another element.
We need a position absolute
inside a position relative.
So finally, let's style this one
by one until it matches our design.
I'm actually going to move this to
the bottom here so that it's easier to
compare.
The first thing we're going
to do is to change the font.
So we're going to set font dash family to
reto aerial,
like the rest of our fonts.
And next, let's change the font size.
Let's change it to font dash
size of maybe 12 pixels.
That looks pretty good. Let's
make it a little bit bolder.
Let's change the font dash weight to 500.
And remember a font
weight of 400 is normal,
700 is bold and 500 is
semi bold. Let's save that.
That looks pretty good. And next we need
spacing on the inside of this element.
So that's padding.
So let's add some padding on the left of
maybe two pixels.
And same for padding on the right
two pixels and then padding on
the top of four pixels,
and then padding on the
bottom of four pixels. Save.
That looks pretty good. Let's add some
more padding on the left and right.
Changes to four pixels
and four pixels. Okay,
so I'm pretty happy with that. Next,
we're going to make our corner
rounded kind of like this.
So to do that we're going to
use border radius, chain Z,
border dash radius to two pixels, save it.
And I think that looks pretty close
to our design. And there we go.
We created the video time in the
bottom right corner of the thumbnail.
Now to give you guys a bit more practice,
I'm going to get you to add the video
time to all of our other videos.
So inside our html,
you're going to add this video time
to the next video here and all the
videos in the H T M L.
So take some time to complete that
and then we'll continue the lesson.
So now that we have the video
time for all of our videos,
we're going to run into another problem.
If we start scrolling up on this page,
you'll notice that the thumbnails
appear above our header.
But another thing is that
the other content like this
text and the channel image
will appear below our header.
So what exactly is going on?
So we mentioned this briefly in the
practice file. If an element like this
video preview is written below
another element like the header up
here, the element that is written
below will appear in front.
That's what's happening
here. We have a header,
and then below that we have the thumbnail,
which is going to appear on
top of the header. However,
what I didn't mention is that this rule
doesn't apply to position static or
these elements with the
default position. Position,
static will always appear at the back.
So that's why you see that these always
appear at the back as soon as we set it
to something that's not position
static like position relative.
The rules of which element was
written first start to apply.
So in this case, because if we scroll up,
the thumbnail row is positioned relative
and it's written below the header in
the code. It's going to
appear on top of the header,
which is what we see and
remember, to fix this,
we need to set a property of Z index.
Let's go into our header c s s
file. We're going to open this file here.
And then inside the header,
we need to set a Z dash index to make the
header appear above the thumbnails.
So let's set a Z index of 100 so that
we have room if we want to put stuff
between these two. Now, if I save it,
the header has a Z index of 100.
The thumbnail row has a default Z index
of zero. 100 is greater than zero.
That means the header will appear
on top of all the thumbnails.
So if we go back and we start scrolling,
you'll notice that we're now all good.
The last thing we'll learn is how to
create this notification count in the top
right corner of this icon.
So let's go into our html,
so YouTube dot html and find where
the code for this notification is.
So if we scroll down to the header and
then scroll down to the right side,
that's this code here, notification icons.
So I'm going to resize my windows
so we can see it properly here.
And now we want to put a notification
number in the top right corner.
So remember, like we've been doing,
we need a position absolute
inside a position relative.
So if we look at our html, what could
we use as our position relative element?
So it can't really be this image because
we can't put stuff inside an image
element. So one option
is this diviv up here,
but a better option is actually
to wrap this image element
inside a diviv. So we're
going to create a div here,
and we're going to put this
image inside this diviv.
So remember that the diviv just
creates a box around whatever's inside.
So it's not going to change the
appearance of this image. However,
by creating this diviv, we can
now make this position relative,
and that's going to help us add
stuff to the top right corner.
So let's give this diviv a class
so that we can style it later.
Let's call it notifications. Dash,
icon dash container.
And inside we're going to
have our notification count.
Let's create a diviv for our notification
count. Let's give it a count of three.
Alexa at this class equals
notifications with an
S dash count.
And now we're ready to style
this and put it in the corner.
So let's go into header dot css.
I'm going to put it on the side
so we can see it more clearly.
And now to start off,
let's scroll down to where we
have our notification code.
So let's scroll all the way down
and we'll find it right here.
And now remember, we're going
to have position relative,
and then inside we're going
to have position absolute.
So let's style the dot notifications
dash icon dash container
and set this to position relative.
And then the notifications
count, dashed count,
and we'll set to position absolute.
So we want to put this
in the top right corner.
So let's set the top to
zero pixels and the right
to zero pixels and to see it better.
Let's set a background color.
So background dash color of red,
and a text color of white.
And now if we save that, it's
sort of in the top right corner,
but it's a little bit too big.
So we're going to style it
just like our design here.
So I'm going to move this up here actually
so that we have a better reference.
And now we're going to style
it by first changing the font.
Let's change the font dash family to
reto aerial,
like before Next, we'll
change the font size.
So this is pretty small. Let's change
the font dash size to maybe 10 pixels.
Okay, should be a little bit
bigger. Let's set it to 12 pixels.
That looks pretty good. And let's add
some spacing on the inside of the element.
Let's add some padding
left of maybe four pixels,
padding right of four pixels,
padding top of two,
and padding dash bottom of two pixels.
And remember to make this a circle,
we're going to give it round corners.
So let's set the border
dash radius to 10 pixels.
So it looks like we're a
little bit too tall here.
We're going to stretch out the sides
by adding more padding to the sides.
Let's change this to maybe
five pixels left and right.
Save it. Okay, maybe six
pixels left and right.
Save it. Okay, so that looks
like a pretty good circle. Next,
we'll change the background color
to something that looks like that.
So I'm just going to pick
something like this, maybe
save.
Perfect.
And I'm going to change the font size
down just a little bit more because this
is pretty small. Let's
change this to 11, save that,
and let's change the padding
left and the right because
it'll, it's a little bit
long on the horizontal side.
And now we have a circle again.
So notice that we put this element in
the top right corner using these two
properties, but it's not enough.
We actually want it out even more.
So we're already at the top edge of
our position. Relative container,
how can we go even higher? So the
trick here is to use negative numbers.
So now this will be positioned
beyond the top edge of our container.
So if I save it here,
this is now five pixels beyond the
top edge of our relative container.
Same thing with right, if we set
it to negative five pixels here,
it's now five pixels beyond the right
edge. So I'm just going to adjust the
valleys here so that
it matches our design.
So let's set the top to something
like negative two. Okay,
so I think that looks pretty close to
our design and I'm pretty happy with it.
So in this lesson, we
learned CSS position,
which is one of the most
important skills in css.
It allows us to create elements like
this header and sidebar that stick to the
page while we scroll, and it allows us
to add elements on top of other elements.
For example,
the video time on top of the thumbnail
and the notification count on top of the
notification icon. So with that,
we learned all the major skills that
we need in H T M L and CSS to complete
our project. In the last lesson,
we're going to create all the
other features that we're missing,
including the sidebar, the tooltip,
and making our current project
look like the final design. Here
in this lesson, we're going
to finish our final project.
We're going to create the sidebar,
we'll resize our video so that it
looks like our design here. And lastly,
we're going to create the tooltip.
When we hover over these icons,
we'll start off with the sidebar.
So I'm going to rearrange my windows here
so that it's a little easier to copy.
So I put the design on the left.
I'm going to put our current
sidebar on the right here,
and I'll resize my windows
so we can see it better.
And now we're ready to begin.
So let's open our code editor and
we're going to open YouTube dot
html. And then we're going to
scroll down to the sidebar code,
which is right here.
So let's take a look at the design of
this sidebar. Our reference design.
If I hover over it, you can see
that is just a bunch of boxes.
And inside each box we
have an icon, some text,
and they're centered
horizontally and vertically.
So we're going to start step by step.
We're first going to create the box.
Let's go into our code.
And instead of this text,
we're going to create six boxes.
We're going to use a
diviv to create each box.
Let's give this diviv a class of sidebar
dash link.
And I'm going to copy
and paste this six times
4, 5, 6. Next,
we're going to style these so that
they have the same size as these boxes.
I'm going to go into our css.
So let's go into sidebar css.
I'm going to put this on the right
side here so we can see it better.
And now we're ready to style these.
Let's target the class sidebar link.
And for each of these, let's give it a
background color so that we can see them.
And let's set it to light gray.
And we'll also give them a height
because without any content in the divs,
they have a height of zero.
So let's set a height of 50 pixels and
let's save it and let's
see how that looks. Okay,
so it's hard to tell the
difference between them.
So let's add some spacing at the bottom
of each div so that we can differentiate
them.
I'm going to add margin dash bottom of one
pixel, save it. Okay, so from this,
it looks like our boxes
are a little bit too short,
so we're going to make them taller.
Let's try a height of maybe 75.
Okay, so I think that's pretty close.
We can get rid of this margin at the
bottom and actually increase this to
76 so that we compensate for
the margin that we removed.
And next, when we look at the design,
these boxes are usually white,
but when we hover over
them, they turn gray.
So instead of having this
background color gray here,
we're just going to set the background
color when we hover over this.
So let's set a hover style dot sidebar,
dash link hover.
And when we hover, we're going
to set the background color to
light and gray. Let's save it.
And now when we hover, it's light gray,
but our design is actually
a lot lighter than that.
So I'm going to change the color here.
I'm going to pick something a little
lighter than this, maybe something here.
Save that and check it out.
And yep,
I think that looks pretty close.
Next we're going to add the
content in each of these boxes.
So first we actually need to
download all of these icons.
So we did the before for these icons.
And just a reminder to do that,
we're going to right click and inspect.
So you'll see that this
actually covers up the sidebar.
What we can do is click these three dots
in the top right and then we can move
the dev tools to another
side of the webpage.
So I'm going to move it
to the right side here.
And now we can see the full sidebar.
Then we're going to click
this in the top left,
click one of these icons and you'll
get the URL to download them here.
So hover over this URL
and then click this.
And now we can control S,
and I'll save it in the folder
that contains my code in the icons
folder.
So make sure you do this for all six of
these icons and I'll see you back after
you're done. All right,
so once we've downloaded all of
the icons from the sidebar here,
we're going to add them to our html.
So let's go into each of
these and add our icons
inside this first diviv, we're
going to add an image element,
and we're going to set a source attribute.
And we're going to load
the icon icons slash
home dot svg because
this is the home icon.
And let's save it. And now we have
our icon. It's a little bit too big,
but we're going to
resize it after. For now,
let's copy this and add the
icons for all of these other
boxes. So we're going to add for this one,
we're going to add the
explore icon. So explore svg,
and for this one is the
subscriptions. And then for this one,
it's originals.
And then for this one
it's YouTube dash music.
And the last one is library.
So I'm going to go down here,
change this to library. Perfect.
Next, we're going to
make these icons smaller.
So usually we would set a
class on these images so
that we can style them with css.
But for this lesson I'm going to show
you another wave that we can target these
images.
So let's go into our sidebar styles
and we're going to learn a new CSS
technique.
So we already learned that this
text before the brackets here,
this tells a computer which elements
we're styling. In this case,
the dot means we're targeting a class
and we're styling all elements that have
the class sidebar link,
which are these elements.
So this bit of text is
called a CSS selector,
and there's actually a lot of different
selectors that we can use in css.
So we already learned
the class name selector,
which looks like this
and starts with a dot.
And we learned the element name selector,
which just starts with the elements name.
Another thing we can do with CSS is to
combine selectors together. For example,
if we said dot sidebar,
dash link and then
wrote a comma down here,
we can add another selector.
So let's say we also
want to target header.
So now all of the styles inside the
brackets will target all elements with the
sidebar link class and all
elements with the header class.
This is an example of a
more advanced selector.
Another selector we can
use is instead of a comma,
we can use a space and
then type another selector
like image. So when we have
a space between these two,
this means that we're targeting all
images inside all sidebar links.
So we're going to target these
images inside sidebar links only.
We're not going to target
all images on the page.
So let's style these images and make
them smaller. We're going to set a height
and let's try 24 pixels.
Let's see how that looks. Okay,
so I think that looks pretty close
to what we have in the design. Next,
we're going to center these
horizontally and vertically.
And finally add the text.
So to center something vertically
is actually challenging In css,
the best way to do it is to use a flexbox.
If we look into our code editor
and open our Flexbox example,
so flexbox html,
and then we right click
and open with live server,
we have a bunch of
examples of using flexbox.
In the last example here we're
doing vertical alignment.
If we scroll down to
our example in our html,
we have this property
called align items center.
So this vertically
centers our content here.
We also have an example
of horizontal centering.
If we scroll up to that
example, which is this one,
we have the property
justified content center.
So using justified content
center and Align item center,
we can put it both horizontally
and vertically centered.
So let's go back into our project
and use a flex box to center these.
We're going to go back to our CSS
and we're going to make each of
these sidebar links a flex box.
So let's set the display property to flex,
and we're going to set
justify dash content
to center. So this will center
horizontally, let's save it.
And now they're horizontally centered.
And then align dash items center for
vertical center. So this
is coming along great.
Next we're going to add the text.
So underneath each of these,
let's add a diviv. So for this first one,
it's going to be called home.
And I'm just going to copy these
and replace it with each
of these texts. So explore
this one is subscriptions,
originals,
YouTube,
music and library.
Now let's start styling
this text a little bit.
I'm going to use this
advanced CSS selector. Again,
we're going to go into
the sidebar link class,
and then we're going to target
all the divs inside sidebar link.
So we're going to target divs.
So this is not going to
target all divs on the page,
only the divs inside sidebar link.
Let's change the font here first.
So we'll set the font dash family to reto
aerial like before, and let's
make the text smaller. Next,
we're going to set the font
dash size to maybe 12 pixels.
Okay, maybe 10 pixels, save it.
And now the next problem we have is that
our elements are appearing beside each
other, not on top of each
other. So why is this happening?
So remember that we can set a
property called flex dash direction
colon row.
If we go into our flex
box example, Flexbox html,
let we scroll all the way to the top.
This was the first thing that we learned.
Display flex and flex direction row.
So if we open this in our browser
and we scroll to the first example,
flex direction row causes our
elements to be displayed horizontally.
So notice that these two are divs, but
they're displayed next to each other,
not on top of each other. Now to change
this, we're actually going to go back
and we're going to use
flex direction column.
So where flex direction row
displays them horizontally,
flex direction column displays our
elements vertically. So if we save it
now it's displaying our elements
one on top of each other.
So this is another direction that we
can use for our flex boxes. By default,
flex boxes are flex direction row,
so they will appear horizontally,
but we can set flex direction column
when we don't want that behavior.
So for flex direction column, these
two properties are actually switched.
So if I remove both of
them first and I first use
justify dash content colon center,
Save it.
Justify content now affects the
vertical direction instead of the
horizontal direction
with flex direction row.
And if I use align dash items,
center align items now affects
the horizontal direction.
So for flex direction column,
these two are reversed.
It's a little bit confusing,
but the more they use flex box,
the more you'll get used to it.
All right, so we're almost done.
We're just going to add some space
between these two to add some space.
Let's add some margin bottom to the image.
So margin dash bottom,
maybe four pixels, save it.
Okay, I think that looks
pretty close to me,
and it looks like our elements
are a little bit too tall.
So I'm actually going to scroll up and
adjust the height here to maybe 74.
Save it. And okay, that looks pretty good.
So one last thing with the sidebar is
that I notice in our design it kind of
covers the header while ours does not.
So to change that,
remember we can change
the Z dash index to be
higher than whatever the header is.
So if we go into our header styles,
header dot css, notice
that the Z index is 100.
So we're going to change our
Z index to bigger than that.
So 200 save it.
And now our sidebar is
covering our header. Next,
I want to move all of these icons down
a little bit more so that it's aligned.
So to do that, I'm going to add some
padding or spacing to the top of this.
So we're going to add some padding
dash top of maybe five pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
Okay, so that looks perfect.
And actually one last thing is I'm going
to make the cursor a pointer when we
hover her over it.
So let's go into our sidebar
link and we'll set the cursor
to a pointer, save it.
And now this looks good to go.
Next we're going to resize these
videos to match the design.
So I'm going to move
this back into one window
and I'm going to resize this so that we
have three videos in each row and now
we can properly switch
back and forth to compare.
So as I switch back and
forth between these,
you can see that there's a size
difference between the videos.
So we're going to fix
that. So for our website,
I notice that the left edge here can
be moved to the right a little more.
So if we look at our design,
it's more to the right,
go back to our current project
design more to the right.
So to move this to the right,
we're actually using padding.
So we had to increase our padding
on the left side of the page.
Let's go back into our code and
we're going to find the padding,
which is in general css.
So remember we added padding to the left
side of the body that's pushing these
elements over here.
So let's increase the padding to maybe
96,
save it and let's compare
it to the design. All right,
so I think that looks perfect.
And we also have padding on the
right while our website does not.
So let's actually also
add padding dash right
of 24 pixels.
Now if we save that there
and compare it to our design,
our videos are now exactly the right
size. So that looks great to me.
The next thing we're going to
tweak is if we look at our design,
the background color here is a light
gray while our background color is white.
So we're going to make the background
color of our entire page a shade of gray
like this.
So let's go into our CSS
and in our body styles in
general css,
let's set the background dash color to
light gray.
And I'm going to hover over
this and select a lighter color,
maybe 2 48. Save it.
And let's compare it to our design.
So this is our website and this is the
design. I think that looks pretty close.
And the last few details I
want to adjust is this part.
So if I look at my design and
I compare it to my website,
it looks like our channel
pictures are a little bit too big.
So if I look at the design here, so
we could make them a little smaller.
So let's go into our code and
we're going to go into the video
styles. Let's open video css.
We're going to find the profile
picture. So if I scroll down,
so this image here is the channel picture.
It has a class of profile picture.
We're going to decrease
the width to maybe 36,
save it compared to our design.
So I think that's the right size. Next,
I'm going to adjust some of these spacing
here. So if I compare to the design,
there's actually a little bit less
spacing here, then our website.
So I'm going to decrease
that. So for our website,
we're adding some margin
bottom to the thumbnail.
The thumbnail row.
I'm going to decrease this to maybe
eight pixels. Let's see how that looks.
And then compared to our design,
so I'm pretty happy with that.
And finally, I'm going to adjust
the spacing between these two.
So for our video title,
if we go into our code
And scroll up here, it
has a margin bottom of 12.
I'm going to decrease
it a little bit to 10,
save it and compare it. Okay,
so I think that's good enough.
It doesn't have to be perfect,
it's a little bit off,
but I think that our current website
here looks really good to me. Anyways,
the final thing we're going to do in this
lesson is we're going to create these
tooltip when we hover over these icons.
So before we learn how to make
these appear, when we hover over,
let's just create these tooltip
and place them below each icon.
So let's go into our website and we're
going to add some tooltip to these.
So we'll go into our code and I'm going
to resize the windows so we can see
better. So we're going
to go into our html,
we're going to scroll up to our header.
And let's first find the search icon here,
which is in the middle section,
and then the search button here.
So to create the tooltip,
we're actually going to use the position
property that we learned earlier.
So remember that we use position to put
this number in the top right corner.
We're going to use position to put a
tool tip below the element right here.
So let's first add a tool
tip inside the button.
So we're going to create a diviv
and let's call this search, let's save it.
And now that's our tool tip.
And now we need to position this
tool tip relative to our button.
So remember from the previous lesson,
we need position absolute
inside position relative.
So let's first add those
position properties.
So we're going to go into the header
CSS file because we're working with the
header. So let's open that up
and I'm going to move it
to the right side here.
And now we're going to scroll down
until we find our search button.
So I'm going to scroll, scroll,
scroll, and it's right here.
So we're going to set this search button,
which is our container to position
Colon relative save it,
and nothing happens because that's
how position relative works.
And now the magic comes when we
set this to position absolute.
So we're actually going to set a class
here so that we can target it a little
easier. We're going to call this tool tip
and we're going to use that advanced
CSS selector we learned earlier.
So we're going to target
search dash button first,
and then we're going to type a space.
And then we're going to type tool tip.
So this means that we're
targeting the dot tool tip class,
not on the entire page, but
only inside the search button.
So now we don't have to come up with a
unique name for this specific tool tip.
So if we save it, we're
going to set this to position
absolute. And now we have an absolute
element inside a relative element.
So if we save that, now we
can start positioning this.
Let's give a background color
so that we can see it better.
So background dash color of maybe gray.
And let's add the text color
to white. So color colon white.
Let's give it some padding on the inside,
some padding top of maybe four pixels,
padding dash bottom,
four pixels padding left four pixels
and padding right for pixels, save it.
And let's actually increase the
padding on the left and right to eight.
See how that looks. Okay,
I'm pretty happy with that.
And now I'm going to set some rounded
corners so we don't have to exactly match
our design. We can make it close enough
so we can set some rounded corners,
border dash radius of four pixels.
It's a little too much
for me set to two pixels.
And I'm also going to make
the font a little bit smaller.
So I'm going to set the
font dash size to 12 pixels.
Save it. I think that
looks pretty good to me.
Next we're going to
use the property's top,
bottom left and right to position
this within the relative element.
So for our cases, let's
start with bottom zero.
So this means that the bottom of our
tooltip will be at the bottom of the
button. If I save this,
that's exactly what we have.
Now to move it even further to the bottom,
we're going to use negative pixels.
So let's set negative 20. Save it.
Okay, so I think that's
looking pretty good.
Let's increase it a little bit more,
increase it to 30 pixels, save it.
Okay, so I'm happy with that position.
Now we're going to learn how to make this
tooltip appear when we hover over this
button.
So the trick here is we're going to
set the opacity or how see through
the tooltip is to zero, which
is completely invisible.
And then when we hover over this button,
we're going to set the opacity to one.
So how do we actually change this
when we hover over the button?
So we're actually going to use a
combination of this advanced CSS
and pseudo classes which are like hover.
So first we're going to target
the search dash button class,
and we're going to add a
pseudo class colon hover.
And now we're going to type
another selector. We're
going to type dot tool tip,
and we're going to set some styles here.
So what this does is that we're going
to target the tool tips only when we're
hovering over this search button.
So up here notice that we're targeting
the tool tips inside the search button,
regardless of whether if we're
hovering over it or not. In this case,
we're going to target all
tooltip inside the search button,
but only when we hover over
it. So when we hover over it,
we can set the tooltip opacity
To one.
So this is a neat trick that you
can do to create tooltip like this.
So if we go into our webpage when
I'm not hovering over the button,
you'll notice that the opacity is zero.
But when I'm hovering over the button,
this tooltip will have an opacity
of one which looks like this.
And now because we're changing the
opacity, we can set a transition.
So let's set a transition. We need
to tell that what to transition,
which is opacity and how long
the transition will take.
Let's say 0.15 seconds, save it.
And when we hover over this,
now we get our tooltip.
Now the last thing I want to show you
is if we hover over the actual tooltip,
you'll notice that because
it's inside this button,
when we hover over the
tooltip with our mouse,
it also counts as
hovering over the button.
We can fix this by disabling hovers on
the tooltip and only allow hovers on the
button. So to disable the
hover on this tooltip,
we're going to use another
CSS property called pointer
Events none.
This means that when our
mouse hovers over the tooltip,
it's not going to do anything.
So that's how we create
these tooltip on our webpage.
Let's do the same thing with
this voice search button.
We're going to go into our HTML and
we're just going to copy this tool tip
and just move it down here into the
voice search button, just like that.
And let's change the text
to search with your voice,
Save it. And now remember
to position this,
we're going to have position
absolute inside position relative.
So let's turn this to
position relative first.
I'm actually going to
make it easier for us.
I'm going to first target
the search dash button,
and I'm going to put this inside here.
And I'm also going to target with a comma,
the voice search button. So this one,
now this code is going to
apply to both of these,
so it saves us a little bit of
coding. Same thing down here.
We're going to apply all of these
styles to the search button,
tooltip and comma,
the voice search button dot tooltip.
So using these advanced CSS
selectors can save us a lot of code.
We're going to scroll down all
the way here to and use a comma
and set this to the voice
search button. So make sure you don't
have a comma at the end there. Save it.
Now when I hover over this,
you'll notice that it doesn't really
work because the text is sort of wrapping
around.
I'm going to fix that by setting
this property white space,
no wrap, save it.
And this will prevent the
text from wrapping around.
Now the last thing I want to do is do
center this tool tip with the button.
To do this,
we can use a flex box because remember
with flex box we can center horizontally
and vertically. In this case,
we want to center horizontally.
So we're going to make we're scroll up
and we're going to make these buttons
flex boxes.
So let's set display flex. By default,
it's flex direction row.
So justify content is going
to center horizontally.
So justify content center, save it.
So now if we hover over our buttons,
you'll notice that the tooltip
are aligned horizontally,
but you also notice that our icons are
not vertically aligned very well. So
let's go back into our code and we're
going to align them in the center with
align dash items center, save it.
So that didn't seem to work, but
if we scroll down into our code,
so way earlier in the course,
we actually added margin top
to the search icon as well as
the voice search icon.
So we just need to get rid of this margin
top and let the flex box handle the
vertical centering. So if we save that,
now the icons are perfectly
centered and if we hover over,
we have a centered tooltip.
The tooltips for these
icons are the same thing,
except if we scroll down, we
currently just have an image.
We're going to need a container like
this that's going to act as our position
relative container. So
let's create a diviv
that's going to contain our upload icon.
Let's cut this and then paste it in here.
Let's give a class of upload dash
icon dash container.
And then inside this container
we're going to have our tool tip.
So let's copy this and
then paste it in here.
And let's call this, let's
look at our design create.
So our tooltip is going
to have the text create.
Next.
We're going to change this to position
relative and position absolute inside.
So let's scroll up.
And we already have this code here that
sets to position relative and centers
everything. And we're going to
add to this the upload icon,
container dot upload,
dash icon, dash container,
save it.
And then we need a position
absolute on this tool tip. So again,
we can just add it in here so we don't
have to copy all this code again with a
comma dot upload dash
icon, dash container,
tooltip save it.
And lastly, we're going to
scroll down and add it to here.
So that appears when we hover.
So let's set dot upload dash icon,
container and dot. When we hover over it,
the tooltip is going
to have opacity of one.
Let's save it and hover over. All
right, so that looks pretty good,
but let's change the font here.
So let's go into this code
which sets our tooltip
styles,
and let's set the font dash family to reto
aerial. Like before. If we
save it and we hover over it,
now we have a nice looking
tooltip on our icons.
So that's how we create these tooltip.
When we hover over these
icons and these buttons,
creating tooltip for these two
other icons are the same thing,
and I'm going to leave it as an
exercise for you to do on your own.
So in this lesson, we
finished up our final project.
We created the sidebar resize,
our videos created the tooltip,
and now if we compare it to our design,
our project looks pretty
much perfect and ready to go.
So here's some exercises you can try on
your own to wrap up everything that we
learned in this course.
In the previous lesson, we finished
our final project, which is this.
In this lesson I'm going to show you
some more useful features of c s s.
We're going to start off
with responsive design.
If we go to our reference design here,
and I'm going to zoom out a little
bit so you can see if I make the page
smaller, you'll notice that we
now have two videos in each row.
If I make the page bigger,
we have four videos.
So notice that at every screen size,
the layout adjusts so that
the website looks good.
So that's the idea of responsive design,
making the website look as good as
possible on every screen size. Now,
if we make this a little bit more narrow
and we switch to our current project,
you'll notice that all of our
content is sort of squished.
So we're going to learn how to implement
responsive design into our project.
Let's go into our code and
we're going to open the file
called video dot css, which
controls the video grid styles.
Let's open that.
And now inside we're going to adjust
our video grid so that when the screen
size is small, we only have two videos
per row. And when the screen size is big,
we have more than three videos per row.
So let's go into our code and we're
going to scroll down and find the video
grid styles. So notice
that for these styles,
we set three columns of equal size.
Now to make this responsive, we're going
to use something called a media query.
So to create a media query,
we're going to type at media,
and then we're going to
give it a screen size.
So we're going to say max dash with colon,
maybe 600 pixels.
And then we're going to
type open squiggly bracket,
and then close quickly bracket.
So the way this works is that we're
going to have a bunch of CSS in here,
and this CSS will only activate
if the screen size is 600
pixels or less. That's what this
max width means. So for example,
let's target the video
grid class inside here
and let's set the grid dash template,
dash columns to one fr, one Fr.
That means from a screen
size of zero to 600 pixels,
we're only going to have two columns.
So we save it and we start to resize.
Notice that once we get to 600 pixels,
we now have two columns in our grid.
Now to figure out how
big our screen size is,
we can right click and inspect,
and I'm going to click these three dots
and move it back down to the bottom like
this. And now when we resize,
you should see the screen size
at the top right of the page.
So it's really up to us to pick a screen
size where we're going to go from three
columns to two.
So I think even at this screen size,
maybe at seven 50, it looks
a little bit squished.
So I'm going to increase
this to 750 pixels.
Let's save it. And now
once we get to seven 50,
we're going to have two videos in each
row and it's not going to be as squished
anymore.
So that's the basics of how to create
responsive designs using these media
queries. Let's do another example.
We're going to have four videos per row
when our screen size gets really big.
So let's set another at media. At media.
And for this time we're going
to set a minimum width of
maybe a thousand pixels.
And then inside here we're going
to copy this and paste it here.
We're going to change grid template
columns to four columns. So one f fr,
one fr.
Now if we save it and we
resize the browser to 1000
pixels, it's going to
become four videos per row.
Now you might need to press command or
control minus to make the webpage smaller
to see this,
but basically the way this works is that
once the screen size hits a thousand
pixels, this will activate and we
have four columns instead of three.
So the last example is that we
can actually combine these two,
so we can set at media and we can set the
min dash width to 7 51 pixels
and the max dash width to
9 99 pixels.
So this will cover the space
between these two measurements here.
So let's actually put this in the middle.
So from zero pixels to a max of seven
50, we're going to have these styles.
And then from 7 51 to 9 99,
we're going to have these styles. So
we're going to set this to three columns,
and then from a thousand and up,
we're going to have four columns.
So this is the basics of how to
create a responsive design like this.
You just have to write a lot
of media queries. All right,
so that's the basics of responsive design.
We're going to go back to our webpages.
I'm just going to zoom back in and
we'll learn the next feature of css.
So let's go to our project
here and open our code.
And let's scroll down to
this dial the video time.
So the next feature we're going to
learn is sort of like CSS shortcuts.
So instead of setting padding on the left,
right top and bottom separately like this,
we can actually use a
property called padding,
which is sort of like a
shortcut for all four of these.
So if we set the padding to four pixels,
this is the same as setting
padding on all four sides.
So we don't need this code anymore.
So it makes it a little cleaner for our
code to use these shorthand properties.
So another thing we can do with
this is we can have two values,
let's say four pixels
and 10 pixels. Save it.
So this first value is going to be
the vertical padding. So padding top,
padding bottom, and the second value
is horizontal padding, padding,
left and padding right?
The next thing we can do
is have four directions.
So 20 pixels and 30 pixels.
Let's see how that looks.
So this is how we can set padding in all
four directions using one line of css.
This first value is the padding top
second value is the padding, right?
Third value is padding bottom,
and fourth is padding left.
You can think of this as first you start
from the top and then you work your way
clockwise around. So that's
what these four values mean.
Another shorthand property is margin,
and this is a substitute
for margin, left margin,
right margin top and margin bottom.
So this margin shorthand property
works the same way as padding.
If we have one value, this is all four
directions. If we have two values,
this first value is the
vertical direction. Second
is a horizontal direction,
and if we have four values of margin,
this is the top right bottom and left.
So these are just examples.
We're going to move our styles back to
four pixels of padding on every side,
and we're going to look at one final
shorthand property, which is the border.
So let's go into our header CSS file
and find these styles for this search
bar. So we're going to scroll
up until we find our search bar,
which is here. And notice for our
borders, we always set a width,
a border style, and a border color.
So instead of setting
these styles separately,
we can use a shorthand
called border. So for border,
we can set one pixel. This
is going to be the width.
We can set another value of solid.
This is going to be the border style,
and we can set the third value of color.
And so this one line of CSS
can replace these three.
If we delete that, then we save.
You can see that everything
still appears normally,
and that's because this border property
is a shorthand for the other three.
The next thing we're going to
learn is called inheritance.
Let's go to our YouTube dot HTML
file and we're going to scroll
down to the video grid,
which is right here.
So inheritance means that
for certain CSS properties,
if we set the property
on the outer element,
it will get passed down to the inner
elements like these. Let's do an example.
We're going to set a
property on the video grid.
We're going to go to the video CSS file,
and we're going to find the video
grid styles, which is all of these.
We're going to set it on this style here.
So we're going to set it for all
screen sizes. Let's add a style.
We're going to make the
text underlined. To do that,
we're going to use this
property text dash decoration
underline. Now if I save this,
you'll see that even though I set text
decoration, underline on the video grid,
all of the paragraphs
inside have been underlined.
So this is called inheritance.
If we set this style on the outer
element, which is the video grid,
it gets passed down to
all the inner elements,
which are the paragraphs here. However,
not all properties are affected
by inheritance. For example,
if we go back to the video CSS file,
and we're going to add a border this time.
So let's add a border and we're
going to make it two pixels wide,
a solid color, and let's just make it red.
And if I save that, you'll see that
the video grid has a border around it,
but this border is not passed
down to the inner elements here.
So inheritance mostly just works with
text properties like text decoration,
underlying color, font,
weight, and font family.
It doesn't affect things like
border padding or margin,
so that's what inheritance
means. Certain properties,
mostly text properties will get passed
down from the outer element to the
inner elements. Now, this can
save us some code. For example,
if we go back to the video dot
CSS file and we scroll down,
you can see that the video time uses a
style called font family reto aerial.
So this changes the font of our text,
and instead of putting
it on the video time,
we're just going to put
it on the entire grid,
and then it will get inherited
by all the elements inside,
which includes the video time.
So I can scroll up to the video
grid and I can set the font
dash family up here so I can set Roto
Ariel. If I save this,
you'll see that nothing changed with
the video time because this style is
being inherited from the video grid. Now,
we can actually take this even further.
If we go to the YouTube dot html file,
you'll see that this video grid is
actually contained within the entire
body. So all of our elements on the
page are contained within the body.
So if we want to set a sort of
default textile on the entire page,
we can actually just put everything in
the body and that'll save us a lot of
code. So let's actually go
back to the video CSS file.
We're going to remove this and save it.
You'll see that the video time
now goes back to the default font,
which is times New Roman,
and these paragraphs actually
use a different set of styles.
So if we go to the file
called General css,
we set the font family for
these paragraphs using just a p
selector here. If we remove this
and save it,
you'll see that it goes back to the
default font of times new enrollment.
Now we're going to set this style on
the body so that it gets inherited
to the entire webpage inside.
So we'll go to General
css and we're going to set
font dash family to Reto
aerial to take advantage of
inheritance. If I save this,
you'll see that all of the
fonts went back to robo,
and that's because we set it on the body
and all of our elements are inside the
body. So this style gets
inherited to the inner elements.
So using this,
we can save more code if we go
to our sidebar and our header.
If I go to the sidebar first,
you'll notice that we're also
using font family roboto aerial.
So we can simply get rid of this because
this style is being inherited from the
body.
And if I go to the header dot css,
you'll notice that we're also using Fond
family Reto AO in a bunch of places.
So we can just get rid of all
of these and take advantage of
inheritance to save us some code.
All right, so there's one last thing
about inheritance that I want to show you.
We're going to go back to our video
CSS file, which is right here.
And now let's get rid of these
properties that we are using to test with
Save it. This time we're
going to go to General css.
We're going to set
another style in the body,
and we're going to set
the property color red to
change the text color of the
entire page to red. If I save it,
you'll see that a lot
of the text is now red,
like these sidebar and the video titles,
but not all of the text has been turned
to red. So why is this happening?
We mentioned this in one
of our earlier lessons.
CSS follows a sort of priority when
you set the same style on the same
element.
So for these video author
and video stats paragraphs,
first we set a color of red from the
body, so that gets inherited down.
But then if we look at the
CSS for these in video CSS and
go into the video author,
which is right here,
you can see that we also set the
color to this gray color. So the
color is being set both by these styles
and by these styles that are inherited
from the body. However,
this style is more specific because it
only targets the video author and the
video stats while the style in
the body targets the entire page.
So that's why this style has higher
priority than the inherited style.
This is called CSS specificity. Generally,
if we set these same style on the same
elements like we have in this situation,
the style that is more
specific, for example,
this style targets only the
video author and video stats,
the style that is more
specific has higher priority,
and it will override a more general
style, which is what we have here.
So using inheritance and specificity,
we're able to both set a default
style on the outer element,
and then if we need to,
we can go to the inner element
and then override that style.
Now in this course,
we didn't go through a lot of detail
about specificity and its rules,
and that's because we were mostly
focused on building out this project,
but you can find all the details about
specificity in the HTML and CSS reference
below the video. For now,
let's go back into general
CSS and let's get rid of this
practice style that we were using,
and now we're ready to move on.
Next, we're going to learn
about semantic elements.
If we go back to our
YouTube dot html file,
so we learned about a bunch of
elements like the diviv, the image,
and the button. There's also another set
of elements called semantic elements.
So for example, header
is a semantic element,
and another example is the nav element.
So these elements actually
work the same way as a diviv,
except they have a special meaning
to screen readers, search engines,
and any other kind of device or
robot that is reading our webpage.
So to have the structure of our webpage
recognized correctly in a screen reader,
we should actually replace some of
our divs with semantic elements.
So for example, we can remove this
diviv and replace it with a header.
So it works the same way as a
diviv, except it's for the robots.
So let's scroll down. We're
going to turn this into a header,
and then we can also
scroll down to our sidebar,
and we're going to change
this to a nav element because
the sidebar on the real YouTube should
help us navigate through the website.
Another semantic element
we can use is called main.
So this should contain the
main contents of your website,
which for us is this part.
We're going to move everything inside here
To the main
element. So I think it's this
I might be missing. Okay, so
move all of that into Maine,
and let's scroll back up. Now,
inside Maine, we're going
to have a video grid,
but we might also have other
things below the video grid.
So the video grid is known as
a section of our main content.
Let's save that and scroll all the
way down to the end of our video grid
and remove this with section.
So that's how Symantec elements
work. They're just the same as divs,
except they give a special meaning and
structure to our page for search engines
and screen readers. Now,
the final thing I want to show you in
this course is how to write comments.
So comments are pieces of code
that the computer ignores,
but you can read yourself to remind
you of information or to tell yourself
what's going on in the
code. So for example,
if we scroll up to our header,
maybe I forgot how we
created this tool tip.
So we can actually add a comment
in the code that reminds us.
So let's add a comment here.
We're going to type less
than exclamation dash, dash,
and we're going to end the comment
with dash greater than like this.
So this is a comment.
If I save the webpage,
you'll see that this text
appears nowhere on the webpage,
and that's because the computer
basically ignores comments.
So we can add comments like put position,
absolute inside position
relative to remind us that we
need to put a position absolute inside
a position relative to create this
tool tip in css. We also have comments.
So for example, if we go here,
we can write a comment by writing
slash star and ending it with
star slash. Now, everything
in between here is a comment.
So we can say this style below will be
inherited. So as you can see comments,
add extra information into our
code without affecting our webpage.
So it's a really useful tool when you're
working on a team to document how your
code works. And now, for everything
in this course, if you ever forget,
remember that you can always Google
it. For example, if I go to Google,
I can search things like
CSS rounded corners,
and it will give us the
border radius property.
I can also search for something
like css, text Don't wrap,
and it will give us the white
space property and the valley white
space, no wrap. So this is
how you learn from here.
You take the techniques that
we learn in this course,
such as the [inaudible] technique,
using grid, flexbox and position,
and then you try to recreate things
that you see on the internet.
And if you ever forget, you can Google
and get the exact code that you need.
So now that we learned all the major
skills that we need to build complex
websites like YouTube,
here are some challenge exercises that
you can do to create other popular
websites on your own.
Thanks so much for taking
this course with me.
I hope you now realize that creating
websites is not as intimidating as it
seems.
We just need to create each part of the
website step by step using the major
features of HTML and CSS that
we learned in this course. Now,
where do we go from here as the next step?
I recommend learning the
JavaScript programming language.
JavaScript is what makes our
webpage interactive. For example,
if we click something, type some
text or drag something onto the page,
JavaScript is what updates our page.
So it's a natural progression
from HTML and css. Now,
if you want to learn JavaScript,
I have a full JavaScript course for
absolute beginners that you can find by
clicking on this link. Again,
thanks so much. For watching.
My name is Simon from Super simple.dev.
I want to make a tech career possible
for anyone. If you have any comments,
questions, or feedback, please leave
them down in the comments section below.
If you want to support this channel
and you want more courses like this,
please click the subscribe button. Thanks
so much, and I'll see you in the next.